bip-0360/ref-impl/rust/README.md, before:


# p2qrh test vectors

This rust project contains the test vectors for BIP-360


## Local Development

These test vectors are being developed in conjunction with forks of [rust-bitcoin](https://github.com/jbride/rust-bitcoin/tree/p2qrh) and [rust-miniscript](https://github.com/jbride/rust-miniscript/tree/p2qrh) customized with p2qrh functionality.
As such, these test vectors assume the presence of these customized forks cloned to your local environment. 

1. create soft-link to your `rust-bitcoin` clone: 
   ```
   $ ln -s /path/to/git/clone/of/rust-bitcoin
   ```

1. create soft-link to your `rust-miniscript` clone: 
   ```
   $ ln -s /path/to/git/clone/of/rust-miniscript
   ```

1. environment variables
   ```
   // Specify Bitcoin network used when generating bip350 (bech32m) address
   // Options: regtest, testnet, signet
   // Default: mainnet
   $ export BITCOIN_NETWORK=<regtest | testnet | signet >
   ```

1. run a specific test:
   ```
   $ cargo test test_p2qrh_single_leaf_script_tree -- --nocapture
   ```

Commit message:

P2tsh pqc merge (#39)
* bip360: p2qrh -> p2tsh

* bip360: updating p2tsh end-to-end doc for signet

* bip360:  more updates to p2tsh end-to-end doc for signet

* bip360: signet miner utility

* bip360: introducing libbitcoinpqc

* bip360: extending p2tsh construction example to use SLH-DSA keypair

* bip360:

1.  change use of OP_SUCCESSx code from 80 -> 127
2.  now able to spend from a P2TSH utxo locked with a PQC enabled
    tapleaf script

* Using crates from self-hosted registry

* bip360: clarifications to p2tsh-end-to-end documentation

* bip360: introducing pqc enabled bdk_wallet dependencies

* bip360: workshop related utils

* bip360: workshop related documentation and Dockerfiles

* bip360:  updates to merkletree svg and png

* rust ref-impl:  now allowing for tap leaf scripts locked by both SCHNORR and SLH-DSA crypto

* bip360: first draft of typescript reference implementation

* bip360 / p2tsh:

1. Adding wasm based libbitcoinpqc example
2. Changing examples to use Schnorr

bip-0360/ref-impl/rust/README.md, after:


# p2tsh test vectors

This rust project contains the test vectors for BIP-360


## Run Test Vectors

These test vectors are being developed in conjunction with forks of [rust-bitcoin](https://github.com/jbride/rust-bitcoin/tree/p2tsh) and [rust-miniscript](https://github.com/jbride/rust-miniscript/tree/p2tsh-pqc) customized with p2tsh functionality.


1. environment variables
   ```
   // Specify Bitcoin network used when generating bip350 (bech32m) address
   // Options: regtest, testnet, signet
   // Default: mainnet
   $ export BITCOIN_NETWORK=<regtest | testnet | signet >
   ```

1. run a specific test:
   ```
   $ cargo test test_p2tsh_single_leaf_script_tree -- --nocapture
   ```

## Local Development


All P2TSH/PQC enabled bitcoin crates are temporarily available in a custom crate registry at:  `https://crates.denver.space`.
These crates will be made available in `crates.io` in the near future.

Subsequently, you will need to execute the following at the root of your rust workspace:

```bash
mkdir .cargo \
    && echo '[registries.kellnr-denver-space]
index = "sparse+https://crates.denver.space/api/v1/crates/"' > .cargo/config
```

Afterwards, for all P2TSH/PQC enabled dependencies used in your project, include a "registry" similar to the following:

```bash
bitcoin = { version="0.32.6", registry = "kellnr-denver-space" }
```
