<pre>
 BIP: ???
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Taproot Asset Script v1
  Author: Olaoluwa Osuntokun <laolu32@gmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://git
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2021-12-10
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document describes the virtual machine execution environment used to
validate Taproot Asset transfers that utilize an
<code>asset_script_version</code> of 1.
The execution environment described in this document is a slight twist on
the taproot validation rules defined in BIPs 341 and 342. Given a Taproot Asset
one or more Taproot Asset leaves to be spent (inputs) and asset leaves to be
created, a "virtual" taproot Bitcoin transaction is created. This transaction
is a 1-input-1-output transaction that commits to the inputs and output set
using a merkle sum tree. With this mapping complete, validation takes place as
normal.

==Copyright==

This document is licensed under the 2-clause BSD license.

==Motivation==

The Taproot Asset overlay permits the usage of a nearly arbitrary virtual machine
for validation of transfers within the system. In order to reduce the scope of
the initial version of the protocol, we describe a way to leverage the existing
Bitcoin Script virtual machine, allowing us to inherit a baseline set of
expressibility, while allowing implementers re-use existing tools and
libraries.

==Design==

The Taproot Asset <code>asset_script_version</code> 1 maps a Taproot Asset input
and output set to a "virtual" Bitcoin transaction.
The input and output sets are committed to within a single 1-input-1-output
transaction using a normal merkle sum tree
(TODO(roasbeef): non-inclusion useful at all here??).
Via the merkle-sum
invariant of the augmented merkle tree, a validator is able to enforce
non-inflation of assets by asserting that the committed input sum is ''equal''
to the committed output sum. Once this invariant is verified, execution resumes
as normal using the BIP 341+342 validation rules, with additional pre-execution
checks that may fail validation early.

===Specification===

A single 1-input-1-output transaction is used to compress the Taproot Asset
state transition state into a constant size transaction. Given a Taproot Asset
commitment (which lives in a taproot output), and its valid opening, the set
the previous asset ID are compressed into a single input, and the present
<code>split_commitment</code> is used to compress the output state.

State transition validation may take one or multiple asset leaves within a
single transaction (with the leaves living in different outputs). When a single
leaf is present, no splits occurred in the state transition, or the asset is a
collectible. When two or more leaves are specified, then all but one of the
leaves were splits resulting from a split event at the Taproot Asset layer. In
this case, the split commitment proof, as well as the validity of the state
transition creating the splits are validated.


====Mapping Inputs====

Input mapping is only executed for state transitions that specify
<code>prev_asset_witnesses</code>.

Given a set of inputs, each identified by a <code>prev_asset_input</code>, the
input commitment (which is used as the previous output) is constructed as
follows:

# Initialize a new empty MS-SMT tree as specified in [[./bip-tap-ms-smt.mediawiki|bip-tap-ms-smt]].
# For each Taproot Asset input ''c_i'', identified in the <code>prev_asset_witnesses</code> field:
## If the asset input has a <code>split_commitment</code> in the witness, that needs to be removed before the serialization step.
## Serialize the referenced previous asset leaf (identified by <code>prev_outpoint || prev_asset_id || prev_asset_script_key</code>) in TLV format.
## Insert this leaf into the MS-SMT tree, with a key of the <code>prev_id_identifier</code>, a value of the serialized leaf, and sum value of the asset amount contained in the leaf.
# Obtain the root hash <code>input_root</code> and sum value <code>input_asset_sum</code> resulting from the tree creation and root digest computation.
# Let the hash of the serialized 36-byte MS-SMT root be the sole previous outpoint (the txid) of the virtual execution transaction.

With the above routine, we map the input set into a MS-SMT tree, which also
commits to the total amount being spent of any given asset. During
verification, as there may be multiple input witnesses, during validation, the
<code>asset_witness</code> for each input is used as the initial witness stack.

Notice that we don't map the <code>relative_lock_time</code> field here within
this unified input commitment. Instead we'll map this during the
verification/signing process, which enables the existence of per-input relative
and absolute lock time.

The following algorithm implements the input mapping required for full state
transition verification:
<source lang="python">
make_virtual_input(prev_inputs: map[PrevOut]TaprootAssetLeaf) -> (MerkleSumRoot, TxIn):
    input_smt = new_ms_smt()

    for prev_out, taproot_asset_leaf in prev_inputs:
        leaf_bytes = taproot_asset_leaf.serialize_tlv()

        input_smt.insert(key=prev_out, value=leaf_bytes, sum_value=taproot_asset_leaf.amt)

    input_root = input_smt.root()

    virtual_txid = sha256(input_root.hash || input_root.sum_value)

    # We only only bind the virtual txid here. Below we'll modify the input
    # index based on the ordering of this SMT.
    return input_root, NewTxIn(NewOutPoint(txid=virtual_txid), nil)
        
</source>

====Mapping Outputs====

Output mapping is only executed for state transitions that specify
<code>prev_asset_witnesses</code>.

Given a Taproot Asset output, and any associated outputs contained within its
<code>split_commitment_root</code>, the output commitment is constructed as
follows:

# For normal asset transfers:
## Let the output value be the sum of all the <code>amt</code> fields on the top level as well as the split commitment cohort set, in other words the last 4-bytes of the <code>split_commitment_root</code>.
## Let the output script be the first 32-bytes of the <code>split_commitment_root</code> value converted to a segwit v1 witness program (taproot).

# For collectible asset transfers
## Let the output value be exactly ''1'' (as each TLV leaf related to a collectible can only ever transfer that same collectible to another leaf).
## Let the output script be the first 32-bytes of an MS-SMT tree with a single element of the serialized TLV leaf of the collectible. 
### The key for this single value is <code>sha256(asset_group_key || asset_id || asset_script_key)</code>. If a <code>asset_group_key</code> field isn't specified, then 32-bytes of zeroes should be used in place.

The following algorithm implements the output mapping required for full state
transition verification:
<source lang="python">
make_virtual_txout(leaf: TaprootAssetLeaf) -> (MerkleSumRoot, TxOut):
    match leaf.asset_type:
        case Normal:
            tx_out = NewTxOut(
                pk_script=[OP_1 OP_DATA_32 leaf.split_commitment_root.hash], 
                value=leaf.split_commitment_root.sum_value,
            )

            return leaf.split_commitment_root, tx_out

        case Collectible:
            output_smt = new_ms_smt()
            output_smt.insert(
                key=sha256(leaf.asset_group_key || leaf.asset_id || leaf.asset_script_key)
                value=leaf.serialize_tlv(),
                sum_value=1,
            )

            witness_program = output_smt.root_hash()

            tx_out = NewTxOut(
                pk_script=[OP_1 OP_DATA_32 witness_program], 
                value=1,
            )

            return output_smt.root, tx_out
</source>

====Validating a State Transition====

If a state transition specifies a <code>prev_asset_witnesses</code> field, then
once the set of inputs and outputs have been mapped to our virtual Bitcoin
transaction (creating a v2 Bitcoin transaction with a single input and output),
validation proceeds as normal according to BIP 341+342 with the following
modifications:

# If the <code>input_asset_sum</code> is not exactly equal to the <code>output_asset_sum</code> validation MUST fail.
# For each <code>prev_input</code> within the set of referenced <code>prev_asset_witnesses</code>:
## If the <code>asset_type</code> of the referenced input leaf doesn't map the <code>asset_type</code> of the Taproot Asset leaf spending the input, validation MUST fail.
## Construct a single-input-single-output Bitcoin transaction based on the input and output mapping above.
### The prev out input index should be the lexicographical index of the <code>prev_id_identifier</code> field for each input.
### The previous public key script should be the <code>asset_script_key</code> for the current previous input, mapped to a v1 segwit witness program (taproot).
### The input value for each included input is to be the <code>amt</code> field of the previous Taproot Asset output being spent.
### Set the sequence number to the <code>relative_lock_time</code> field of the input, if it exists.
## Set the lock time of the transaction as the <code>lock_time</code> of the input TLV leaf being validated, if it exists.
## All signatures included in the witness MUST be exactly 64-bytes in length, which triggers <code>SIGHASH_DEFAULT</code> evaluation.
## If the <code>prev_asset_id</code> is blank, then ALL witnesses MUST be blank as well and the <code>prev_outpoint</code> values as well. In this case, verification succeeds as this is only a creation/minting transaction.
## If the <code>asset_id</code> value is NOT the same for each Taproot Asset input and output, validation MUST fail.
### Alternatively, assert that each input and output references the same <code>asset_group_key</code> field.
## Perform external lock time and relative lock time validation:
### If a <code>relative_lock_time</code> field exists, if the input age of the referenced TLV leaf is less than <code>relative_lock_time</code> validation MUST fail.
### If a <code>lock_time</code> field exists, if the block height of the block that includes the transaction is less than <code>lock_time</code> validation MUST fail.
## Validate the transaction according to the BIP 341+342 rules.

We explicitly implement lock time semantics at this level, as the sequence and
lock time fields in the context of Bitcoin itself are validated from the PoV of
connecting a new block to the end of the main chain. 

Otherwise, if a state transition only specifies a <code>split_commitment_proof</code>, then:
# If the Taproot Asset output to be validated only specifies a <code>split_commitment_proof</code> and no explicit inputs, then a valid inclusion proof for the output MUST be presented and valid.
## If the proof is invalid, then validation MUST fail.
# Given the "parent" split, execute the input+output mapping and verify the state transition using the logic above.

The following algorithm implements verification for top level Taproot Asset
leaves, as well leaves created via split commitments:
<source lang="python">
verify_taproot_asset_state_transition(leaf: TaprootAssetLeaf, leaf_split: TaprootAssetLeaf) -> bool
    if is_valid_issuance_txn(leaf):
        return true

    if leaf_split is not None:
        if leaf is None:
            return false

        if !verify_split_commitment(leaf.split_commitment_root, 
            leaf_split.split_commitment_proof):

            return false

    input_smt, tx_in = make_virtual_input(leaf.prev_inputs)
    output_smt, tx_out =  make_virtual_txout(leaf)

    if input_smt.sum_value != output_smt.sum_value:
        return false

    virtual_tx_template = NewTx([tx_in], [tx_out])
    for input in range leaf.prev_inputs:
       if input.asset_type != leaf.asset_type:
           return false
       
       match input.asset_id:
          case AssetID:
              if input.asset_id != leaf.asset_id:
                  return false
          case GroupKey:
              if input.asset_group_key != leaf.asset_group_key:
                  return false

       virtual_tx = virtual_tx_template.clone()

       if !parse_valid_schnorr_sigs(input.asset_witness):
           return false

       virtual_tx.tx_in[0].witness = input.asset_witness
       virtual_tx.tx_in[0].prev_out.index = input_smt.leaf_index_of(input)

       prev_pk_script = OP_1 OP_DATA_32 input.asset_script_key
       input_value = input.amt

       if input.relative_lock_time != 0:
           virtual_tx.tx_in[0].sequence = relative_lock_time

           input_age = conf_input_age(input)
           if num_confs(input) < input_age:
               return false

       if input.lock_time != 0:
           virtual_tx.lock_time = leaf.lock_time

           block_height = env.block_height()
           if block_height < virtual_tx.lock_time:
               return false

       vm = new_script_vm(
           prev_pk_script=prev_pk_script, tx=virtual_tx, input_index=0, 
           input_amt=input_value,
       )

       if !vm.Execute():
           return false

    return true
</source>

==Test Vectors==

Test vectors for [[Validating a State Transition]] can be found here:
* [[bip-tap-vm/vm_validation_generated.json|VM validation test vectors]]
* [[bip-tap-vm/vm_validation_generated_error_cases.json|VM validation error test vectors]]

The test vectors are automatically generated by
[https://github.com/lightninglabs/taproot-assets/tree/main/vm unit tests in
the Taproot Assets GitHub repository].

==Backwards Compatibility==

==Reference Implementation==

github.com/lightninglabs/taproot-assets/tree/main/vm
