<pre>
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Mempool Policy
  Title: Ephemeral Anchors
  Author: Gregory Sanders <gsanders87@gmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  License: BSD-3-Clause
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2023-01-11
</pre>

==Introduction==

===Abstract===

Ephemeral Anchors are a mempool policy carve-out that allows any value utxos,
even 0-value dust, to be created, provided it is also consumed within the same
mempool package. This ephemeral anchor is a "mutex lock" for the transaction,
allowing for robust fee bumping by wallets, not requiring any special key material
to do so, and avoiding all known transaction pinning vectors.

===Motivation===

One definition of transaction pinning is the intentional or unintentional blocking
of a getting a transaction mined that would otherwise be rational for the miner
to include in the next block without the attacker paying anything in many cases.
This can result in wallets simply not supporting fee bumping due to complexity,
or in certain smart contract cases such as Hash Time Locked Contracts, outright theft.

[https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28948 V3] transactions, which this proposal is built on, greatly mitigates [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0125.mediawiki BIP125]
pinning vectors, where an adversary can vastly increase the required fees to replace a
transaction that will not be mined quickly, or disallow replacement altogether.
Depending on certain factors, this economic value can reach over 500 times increase
in required fees to replace the attacker's transaction. V3 transactions end
up reducing this attack surface by 100 times, resulting in 5 times increase in fees
using the same running example. This policy can be thought of as a "RBF carve-out".

The major pinning vector left is "package limit pinning", where a counterparty
either maliciously or accidentally pins a transaction by exhausting the maximum
descendant limit of a transaction package using their own outputs, and is unwilling
or unable to get the package mined. This leaves the honest user unable to spend their
own outputs in the transaction package, as there is no RBF rule in place for evicting
"sibling" output spends from the same parent transaction.

One existing mitigation for this issue is the [https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15681 CPFP carve out], which allows
a "one more" policy these limits, given some restrictions. This carve-out only works for
transactions with up to two immediately-spendable outputs. This leaves a lot to be
desired:

* It does not solve many-party contract pinning, such as a three-party payment channel
* It does not solve batched payments pinning if the service is unable to double-spend its own inputs. For example, an exchange may require strict separation between client funds and fee funds for security reasons.
* In two-party smart contracts, all but two outputs must be relative-timelocked, which interferes with tooling such as [https://bitcoin.sipa.be/miniscript/ Miniscript] and smart contract composition such as making an output that is directly deposited into another smart contract or any wallet with standard address types.

This proposal gives a standard way to create a 0-fee "parent" transaction
which can be fee-bumped by any wallet by introducing a special 0-value anchor output
which MUST be spent within the same relay package.

===Implications===

In conjunction with V3 rules of a transaction having up to one child,
if a "parent" transaction has an ephemeral anchor, any spend of that parent transaction's
outputs must also include the ephemeral anchor spend in the same transaction, meaning it can
be double-spent by any other party via existing RBF rules. This "mutex lock" supersedes
the LN-focused CPFP carve-out, neatly solving the remaining issues with multiparty constructs and Miniscript
compatibility.

===Expected Use Cases===

* Batched payments with segregated fee pools: Batched payments that can be fee bumped without access to customer deposit related key material
* Simplified watchtowers: No requirement for watchtowers to be registered with privileged key material
* Payment accelerators: Users can submit transactions to transaction accelerators, who can fee bump using their own infrastructure
* Multiparty smart contracts: LN BOLTs can be revamped to remove `1 CSV` and value-sapping anchors.
* [https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/100537/what-is-spacechain Spacechains]

===Unsolved Pinning Scenarios===

One major class of pinning vectors yet unsolved is when the pre-signed transaction uses
SIGHASH_ANYONECANPAY. This mode should be avoided as a pinning DoS is trivial.

Second is any other transaction type such as coinjoins, where the wallet user doesn't
have "veto" power over all inputs in the transaction. A counterparty can double-spend
their inputs, and this can still result in a variety of pinning vectors, albeit
perhaps reduced in severity or chance of success.

===Related Work===

[https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2020-September/018168.html Transaction Sponsors] is a softfork proposal to allow transactions to
indirectly sponsor transactions with no explicit relationship in the classical utxo
model. Ephemeral Anchors can be viewed as a type of opt-in transaction sponsors implemented
purely in policy.

Using a 0-value CPFP anchor is not a new idea, see:

* [https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-May/015931.html LN-dev discussion on 0-value anchors]

The discussion lacked a solution to the issue of the dust entering into the utxo set
causing negative externalities, and also was more weakly motivated by not solving package limit pinning.
Repackaging the idea within the context of ancestor package relay and in light of the latest transaction pinning
research, we can mitigate the negative externalities while solving substantial problems.

==Definitions==

Ephemeral anchor: An output with the scriptPubKey of exactly <code>OP_1 <0x4e73></code>, which is a non-taproot witness v1 script.

Ephemeral anchor transaction: A transaction that has an ephemeral anchor

==Specification==

A new output script type is made policy standard to spend, known as an ephemeral anchor.

Ephemeral anchors of any satoshi value are standard for relay.

When received by a peer for inclusion to the mempool an ephemeral anchors transaction MUST:

* Be an otherwise valid V3 transaction
* Be 0-fee
* Have only one ephemeral anchor
* Have the ephemeral anchor spent in the same ancestor relay package

or will be rejected by policy. All other policy checks are left in place.
If included in an otherwise valid block, these additional constraints do not apply
as this is a policy-only change.

It is recommended that miners should not mine ephemeral anchor transactions
without also mining the spend in the same block. This means miners should not
prioritise transactions that create ephemeral anchors but instead should just prioritise the spend;
mining software is encouraged to enforce that limitation.

No witness data for ephemeral anchors spends should be allowed, to preclude witness
stuffing.

== Backward compatibility ==

Ephemeral anchor spends were previously non-standard, so there are no known conflicts
with previous usage.

==Implementation==

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/29001

==Acknowledgements==

Thank you to all those listed for foundational work
and insightful feedback(in last name order):

* Richard Meyers
* James O'Beirne
* Antoine Poinsot
* Antoine Riard 
* Jeremy Rubin
* Bastien Teinturier
* Anthony Towns
* Gloria Zhao

==References and Rationale==

<references/>
