<pre>
  BIP: 385
  Layer: Applications
  Title: raw() and addr() Output Script Descriptors
  Author: Pieter Wuille <pieter@wuille.net>
          Andrew Chow <andrew@achow101.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0385
  Status: Draft
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2021-06-27
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document specifies <tt>raw()</tt> and <tt>addr()</tt> output script descriptors.
<tt>raw()</tt> encapsulates a raw script as a descriptor.
<tt>addr()</tt> encapsulates an address as a descriptor.

==Copyright==

This BIP is licensed under the BSD 2-clause license.

==Motivation==

In order to make descriptors maximally compatible with scripts in use today, it is useful to be able to wrap any arbitrary output script or an address into a descriptor.

==Specification==

Two new script expressions are defined: <tt>raw()</tt> and <tt>addr()</tt>.

===<tt>raw()</tt>===

The <tt>raw(HEX)</tt> expression can only be used as a top level descriptor.
As the argument, it takes a hex string representing a Bitcoin script.
The output script produced by this descriptor is the script represented by <tt>HEX</tt>.

===<tt>addr()</tt>===

The <tt>addr(ADDR)</tt> expression can only be used as a top level descriptor.
It takes an address as its single argument.
The output script produced by this descriptor is the output script produced by the address <tt>ADDR</tt>.

==Test Vectors==

TBD

==Backwards Compatibility==

<tt>raw()</tt> and <tt>addr()</tt> descriptors use the format and general operation specified in [[bip-0380.mediawiki|380]].
As this is a wholly new descriptor, it is not compatible with any implementation.
The reuse of existing Bitcoin addresses allows for this to be more easily implemented.

==Reference Implementation==

<tt>raw()</tt> and <tt>addr()</tt> descriptors have been implemented in Bitcoin Core since version 0.17.
