<pre>
 BIP: ???
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Merkle Sum Sparse Merkle Trees
  Author: Olaoluwa Osuntokun <laolu32@gmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://git
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2021-12-10
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document describes a merkle-sum sparse merkle tree (MS-SMT) data
structure.  This is an augmented version of a sparse merkle tree that includes
a sum value which is combined during the internal branch hashing operation.
Such trees permit efficient proofs of non-inclusion, while also supporting
efficient fault proofs of invalid merkle sum commitments.

==Copyright==

This document is licensed under the 2-clause BSD license.

==Motivation==

Taro is a Taproot-native asset overlay protocol. Rather than post all asset
related data on-chain in <code>OP_RETURN</code> outputs, the protocol instead
uses a series of commitments anchored within the Taproot script tree.  When
handling unique assets, it's important to be able to prove that the former
owner (or seller) of the asset is no longer committing to it within their tree.
Additionally, when carrying out multi-asset swaps, verifiers need to be able to
efficiently verify that no new assets are being created (inflation check). The
MS-SMT supports both non-inclusion proofs, and non-inflation proofs.

==Design==

A merkle sum tree is a merkalized key-value map simulated over a particia
merkle tree of depth 256 (as we use sha256 as our hash function). The "base"
state of the tree, is a merkle tree with 2^256 leaves, storing an "empty hash".
Within this tree, the digests of an empty leaf, and empty internal nodes for
each level can be computed ahead of time. The "value" of an empty leaf is zero.

In addition to storing the hash digest of a leaf/branch, an 8-byte value is
also stored along side the entry, making each entry 40 bytes in length. The
root hash therefore commits to the digest of all items in the leaf, as well as
the sum of all the "sum values" in the set of leaves. When combining two
branches/leaves, the sum of the left and right leaf/branch is serialized along
with the hash digest of the nodes.

When inserting a new key into the tree, at each level, the ith bit of the key
is used to traverse left or right down the tree. Due to this traversal, every
possible key has a unique location (position wise) within the set of leaves. A
non-inclusion proof is the proof that the value at the unique position for a
key is empty. 

Due to the nature of the mapping, sparse merkle trees are ''history
independent'' meaning no matter the inserting order, given the same set of keys
and values, the same root hash will always be produced.  As the size of the
tree is intractable, a series of techniques are used to maintain a relevant set
of branches and leaves in memory, using a persistent key-value store to store
the relevant unique items of the tree. Proofs can be compressed by using a
bitmap to indicate if the next node in the proof is an empty hash for that
level, or the parent of the item being proved.

===Specification===

We use <code>sha256</code> as our hash function, and 8-byte sum values.

====Building the Empty Hash Map====

The map of all empty hashes by level <code>empty_hashes</code> can be
pre-computed ahead of time, as:
* The hash of an empty leaf is <code>empty_hash_1 = sha256(nil, nil)</code>
* The hash of an empty branch at the second level is <code>empty_hash_2 = sha256(empty_hash_1, empty_hash_1)</code>
* and so on...

We refer to the map resulting from this route as the
<code>empty_hash_map</code>:
<source lang="python">
build_empty_hash_map() -> map[int][32]byte:

    empty_hash_map = make(map[int][32]byte)
    prior_level_hash = None
    for i in range(256):
        if prior_level_hash is None:
            prior_level_hash = sha256(nil, nil, 0)
            empty_hash_map[i] = prior_level_hash
            continue

        empty_hash_map[i] = sha256(prior_level_hash, prior_level_hash, 0)

    return empty_hash_map

</source>

====Looking Up Items====

Looking up an item in the tree requires traversal down the tree based on the
next bit position of the key itself. We assume the existence of a persistent
key-value store that maps the hash of a node to the left and right digests of
its children.

The following routine specifies the lookup algorithm:
<source lang="python">
lookup_item(key [32]byte, db KVStore) -> MerkleSumLeaf:

    root_hash, _ = db.fetch_root_hash()
    current_branch = root_hash

    value_hash, value_sum = None
    for i in range(256):
        if bit_index(i, key) == 0:
            current_branch, _ = db.get_children(current_branch)
        else:
            _, current_branch = db.get_children(current_branch)

    return MerkleSumLeaf(current_branch.hash, current_branch)

</source>

====Inserting Items====

Inserting items into the tree entails traversing the tree until we arrive at
the position for the leaf, then bubbling up (hashing and summing) the change
all the way up the tree.

<source lang="python">
insert_item(key [32]byte, value []byte, sum_value int64, db KVStore) -> None:
    root_hash, _ = db.fetch_root_hash()
    current_branch = root_hash

    insertion_path = []
    value_hash, value_sum = None
    for i in range(256):
        if bit_index(i, key) == 0:
            current_branch, sibling = db.get_children(current_branch)
            insertion_path.append(sibling)
        else:
            sibling, current_branch, = db.get_children(current_branch)
            insertion_path.append(sibling)

    db.insert(current_branch.parent_hash, MerkleSumLeaf(key, value, sum_value))

    for i in range(256):
       updated_sum = sum_value + inclusion_path[-1].value

       sibling_node = insertion_path[-1]
       if bit_index(i, key) == 0:
           updated_value = sha256(value, sibling_node.sum_value, updated_sum)

           db.insert(key=updated_value, value=(sibling_node, value))
        else:
           updated_value = sha256(insertion_path[-1].hash, value, updated_sum)

           db.insert(key=updated_value, value=(value, sibling_node))
          
       value = updated_value
       sum_value = updated_sum

       insertion_path.pop()

    return None
</source>


====Deleting Items====

Deleting an item is identical to insertion, but we delete the item in the tree
by setting its value to the empty hash.
<source lang="python">
delete_item(key [32]byte, db KVStore) -> None:
    return insert_item(key, nil, 0, db)
</source>

====Creating Inclusion & Non-Inclusion Proofs====

An inclusion proof of an item proves that the item is found in the tree, and
has a certain sum value. A non-inclusion tree proves the opposite: that an item
is not found within the tree.

Generating an inclusion or non inclusion proof entails walking down the tree
and obtaining all the sibling hashes and their sum values:
<source lang="python">
gen_merkle_proof(key [32]byte, db KVStore) -> []MerkleSumNode
    root_hash, _ = db.fetch_root_hash()
    current_branch = root_hash

    proof_nodes = []
    value_hash, value_sum = None
    for i in range(256):
        if bit_index(i, key) == 0:
            current_branch, sibling = db.get_children(current_branch)
            proof_nodes.append(sibling)
        else:
            sibling, current_branch, = db.get_children(current_branch)
            proof_nodes.append(sibling)

    return proof_nodes
</source>

A plain proof is always a series of 256 merkle sum elements. However we can
compress proofs by using an extra bitmap that indicates if the proof contents
are an empty hash or not.
<source lang="python">
compress_merkle_proof(proof []MerkleSumNode) -> CompressedProof:
   compressed_proof = new_compressed_proof(
       compression_bits=new_bit_vector(256),
       proof=[]MerkleSumNode{},
   )

   for i, proof_node in proof:
       if proof_node == empty_hash_map[i]:
           compressed_proof.compression_bits.append(1)
        else:
           compressed_proof.proof.append(proof_node)

   return compressed_proof
</source>

====Verifying Inclusion & Non-Inclusion Proofs====

In order to verify a proof, we need to confirm that if starting at the proof,
if we hash and sum up the tree, then we'll end up at the same root hash and sum
value.

Before proofs are verified, the proof should first be decompressed:
<source lang="python">
decompress_merkle_proof(compressed_proof CompressedProof) -> []MerkleSumNode:
    proof = []MerkleSumNode{}

    for i in range(256):
        if compressed_proof.bit_at(index=i) == 1:
            proof.append(empty_hash_map[i])
        else:
            proof.append(compressed_proof.proof)
            compressed_proof = drop_1(compressed_proof.proof)

    return proof
</source>

With the proof decompressed, we verify the proof by hashing and summing up each
level.
<source lang="python">
verify_merkle_proof(proof []MerkleSumNode, root MerkleSumNode, 
    key [32]byte, value []byte, value_sum int64) -> bool:

    for i in range(256):
        if bit_index(i, key) == 0:
            value = sha256(proof[-1-i], value, proof[1-i].sum, value_sum)
        else:
            value = sha256(value, proof[-1-i], value.sum, value_sum)

    return root.hash == value && root.sum == value_sum
            
</source>


====Caching Optimizations====

TODO(roasbeef):


==Test Vectors==

TBD

==Backwards Compatibility==

==Reference Implementation==

github.com/lightninglabs/taro
