<pre>
BIP: TBD
Layer: Applications
Title: Deterministic Satoshi Indexing (Ordinal Scheme)
Author: Warlock <thewrlck@proton.me>
Comments-Summary: No comments yet
Comments-URI: https://github.com/ordinals/ord/discussions/126
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Created: 2026-XX-XX
License: CC0-1.0
</pre>

== Abstract ==

This document specifies a deterministic scheme for assigning serial numbers
to satoshis (sats) and tracking their movement across transactions.

The scheme enables independent implementations to consistently identify and
track individual sats without requiring changes to Bitcoin consensus rules,
transaction formats, or network behavior.

== Motivation ==

Bitcoin does not define persistent identifiers for individual satoshis.
Applications that require stable, transferable identifiers must therefore
define their own conventions.

Without a standardized scheme, different implementations may assign
inconsistent identifiers to sats, leading to fragmentation and reduced
interoperability between wallets, indexers, and other software.

This document specifies a deterministic indexing method so that independent
implementations can arrive at identical results when assigning and tracking
satoshis.

== Scope ==

This proposal:

* Defines a deterministic numbering scheme for sats
* Defines how sats are assigned to transaction outputs
* Enables consistent cross-implementation behavior

This proposal does NOT:

* Modify Bitcoin consensus rules
* Require changes to transaction validation
* Introduce new script or transaction types
* Require adoption by nodes or wallets

== Specification ==

=== Satoshi Numbering ===

Each satoshi is assigned a unique ordinal number based on the order in which
it is mined.

Numbering begins at 0 and increases sequentially with each satoshi created
via block subsidies.

The ordinal numbers assigned to sats depend only on the theoretical issuance
schedule defined by Bitcoin, not on actual miner behavior.

=== Block Subsidy ===

<code>
def subsidy(height):
  return 50 * 100_000_000 >> height // 210_000
</code>

=== First Ordinal in Block ===

<code>
def first_ordinal(height):
  start = 0
  for h in range(height):
    start += subsidy(h)
  return start
</code>

=== Ordinal Assignment ===

For each block:

1. Generate ordinals for newly created sats from the subsidy.
2. Process transactions in block order.
3. For each transaction:

   * Collect input sats in input order
   * Assign sats to outputs in output order (FIFO)

<code>
def assign_ordinals(block):
  first = first_ordinal(block.height)
  last = first + subsidy(block.height)
  coinbase_ordinals = list(range(first, last))

  for transaction in block.transactions[1:]:
    ordinals = []
    for input in transaction.inputs:
      ordinals.extend(input.ordinals)

    for output in transaction.outputs:
      output.ordinals = ordinals[:output.value]
      del ordinals[:output.value]

    coinbase_ordinals.extend(ordinals)

  for output in block.transactions[0].outputs:
    output.ordinals = coinbase_ordinals[:output.value]
    del coinbase_ordinals[:output.value]
</code>

=== Coinbase Handling ===

The coinbase transaction is treated as having:

* An implicit input equal to the block subsidy
* Additional implicit inputs representing transaction fees, ordered by
  transaction position in the block

If a miner underclaims the subsidy, unassigned sats are considered destroyed.

=== Duplicate Transaction IDs ===

In the event of duplicate transaction IDs, newer outputs replace older ones,
consistent with Bitcoin Core behavior. Sats contained in displaced outputs are
considered destroyed.

=== Satpoint Notation ===

A sat can be identified by its position within an output:

<code>
<txid>:<output_index>:<offset>
</code>

Example:

<code>
680df1e4...:0:6
</code>

== Rationale ==

This design is intended to:

* Be deterministic and reproducible
* Require no changes to Bitcoin consensus
* Allow independent implementations to interoperate

The FIFO transfer rule follows naturally from Bitcoin’s transaction structure
and avoids ambiguity in assignment.

== Deployment Experience ==

As of 2026, implementations of this scheme have been deployed on:

* Bitcoin mainnet
* Signet
* Testnet

These implementations include:

* Indexers tracking sat locations
* Wallets supporting sat-level control
* Block explorers exposing sat positions

Observed properties:

* Transactions using this scheme remain valid standard Bitcoin transactions
* No consensus or relay changes are required
* Edge cases (e.g., dust handling, fee assignment) are manageable with careful construction

== Interoperability Considerations ==

Without a shared specification:

* Different systems may assign different ordinals
* Wallets may not correctly transfer intended sats
* Indexers may disagree on sat locations

This specification enables consistent behavior across implementations.

== Privacy Considerations ==

This scheme is opt-in at the application level.

Tracking individual sats may reduce privacy for users who rely on such
tracking, but does not affect users who do not adopt it.

Implementations should avoid mixing tracked sats with unrelated funds where
privacy is a concern.

== Fungibility Considerations ==

This proposal does not alter Bitcoin’s consensus-level fungibility.

Any sat can still be spent to any address, and all sats remain equivalent
within the protocol.

== Drawbacks ==

=== Large Index Size ===

Indexes tracking sat positions may require significant storage.

As of 2026:

* UTXO → ordinal mappings require substantial disk space
* Reverse mappings may be computationally expensive

=== Transaction Complexity ===

Constructing transactions that move specific sats may require:

* Careful input/output ordering
* Handling of dust limits
* Accurate fee estimation

== Security Considerations ==

Tracking sats requires following the full transaction history.

Implementations must ensure that:

* Intended sats are not lost as fees
* Sats are not accidentally transferred to unintended outputs

== Backward Compatibility ==

This proposal is fully backward compatible.

It does not require:

* Consensus changes
* Network upgrades
* Changes to existing wallets or nodes

== Reference Implementation ==

A reference implementation is available at:
[https://github.com/casey/ord ord repository]
