<pre>
  BIP: ???
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Taproot Assets PSBT
  Author: Oliver Gugger <gugger@gmail.com>
          Olaoluwa Osuntokun <laolu32@gmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://git
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2023-02-24
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document describes the custom fields used in the
[[https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0174.mediawiki|Partially
Signed Bitcoin Transaction (PSBT, BIP-0174)]] format for Taproot Asset state
transition transactions.

==Copyright==

This document is licensed under the 2-clause BSD license.

==Design==

A Taproot Asset state transition transaction is also referred to as a "virtual
transaction" or asset transfer transaction. The word "virtual" is used to
distinguish between these asset transfers that only happen in the off-chain,
asset overlay context as opposed to "anchor" transactions, which are BTC level
on-chain transaction that commit many asset level transfers to the Bitcoin
chain.

A virtual transaction has many similarities to its Bitcoin wire transaction
counterpart in that it spends one or more asset inputs (asset UTXOs or asset
"coins") and creates one or more new asset outputs.

The main difference to a Bitcoin transaction is that a virtual asset transaction
does not place the witness that satisfies each input's previous output script in
the input itself but instead uses the <code>prev_asset_witnesses</code> field of
the dedicated output that houses the split root asset.
This allows a many-in-many-out virtual transaction to be compressed into a
1-in-1-out transaction (as described in
[[./bip-tap-vm.mediawiki|bip-tap-vm]]) for validation in the Taproot Asset
Virtual Machine.

To assemble the full witness stack that satisfies each input's previous output
script the transaction might need to be signed by multiple parties and/or
devices. This requires the virtual transaction to be passed around among
multiple participants, each adding their part (e.g. signatures) to it. Given the
similarities of virtual transactions to existing Bitcoin transactions, the PSBT
format was chosen as the exchange format for virtual asset state transfers as
well, with a set of new PSBT <code><keytype></code>s as defined in this
document. 

==Specification==

A virtual transaction can only contain inputs and outputs of assets that are
fungible among each other. Assets are considered fungible if they either have
the same genesis ID (were minted in the same tranche) or reference the same
<code>group_key</code> (were minted in different tranches).

Within a virtual transaction multiple inputs (asset coins) that have the '''same
genesis ID''' can be merged and split the same way Bitcoin inputs can be merged
and split again. Fungible assets with '''different genesis IDs''' (but same
<code>group_key</code>) can be used together in the same virtual transaction in
order to satisfy a payment request, but merging two fungible assets (with
distinct asset IDs) into the _same_ asset UTXO is disallowed. See the
[[./bip-tap-vm.mediawiki|bip-tap-vm]] for more details.

The construction of the virtual transaction outputs must follow different rules
depending on whether the output is received in an interactive or non-interactive
way by the recipient:
<ul>
<li>
''Interactive:'' The recipient will see the full virtual transaction (e.g. as
a PSBT), including the fully signed new asset leaf. They have all the required
information to be able to fully construct the BTC level anchor output Taproot
key (including the complete asset witness and potentially multiple asset leaves
being committed to in a single BTC level anchor output) to observe the inbound
transfer on chain. Therefore in a scenario where a leaf is sent completely (full
value send), a "split tombstone" (see below) is not required.
</li>
<li>
''Non-interactive'': The recipient has created a Taproot Asset address and is
only watching that Taproot output key on chain. Assets must be committed to the
tree as a split asset, with the split commitment pruned before serializing, to
make the resulting Taproot Asset tree completely predictable for the receiver.
The split commitment and root asset proof will be delivered in the proof file.
A full value send must also be created as a split with the sender creating a
zero value "split tombstone" output with the NUMS point as the script key (see
below).
</li>
</ul>

TODO(guggero): Describe how fungible assets are handled in a non-interactive way
once that is defined.

When splitting an asset UTXO a split commitment is created (as described in
[[./bip-tap-vm.mediawiki|bip-tap-vm]]). The split root is placed in
one of the outputs (often being the change output going back to the sender of
the asset) and marked with the `IsSplitRoot` flag.
If the remaining change of a split is 0, the <code>script_key</code> of the
split root asset output should be the well-known NUMS point (using the string
"taproot-assets" and the traditional "hash and increment" approach to generating
the point) to prove the output cannot be spent further.
This so-called "split tombstone" is required for non-interactive sends (send to
Taproot Asset address) of the full value of a coin.
These zero-value tombstone outputs can be pruned in an interactive scenario in
which the recipient is a ware of the full root asset leaf (including the
TX witness) and can construct the commitment tree root correctly.

==Custom PSBT fields for Taproot Asset virtual transactions==

[[https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0174.mediawiki|BIP-0174]]
defines roughly 6 global, 24 input and 7 output <code>keytype</code>s. This
leaves enough room for new BIPs to specify additional types without a big risk
of collision. The proprietary type <code>0xFX</code> does not apply to this case
as that is meant for application/vendor specific data, not fields declared in
a BIP.

To further reduce the risk of colliding with key types of other (in-flight) BIPs
we start at the (arbitrarily chosen) value <code>0x70</code> for each section
of new key types.

===Global types===

{|
! Name
! <tt><keytype></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt> Description
! <tt><valuedata></tt>
! <tt><valuedata></tt> Description
|-
| Virtual Transaction Marker
| <tt>PSBT_GLOBAL_TAP_IS_VIRTUAL_TX = 0x70</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><byte 0x01></tt>
| The static marker of <code>0x01</code> to identify this transaction as a
Taproot Asset virtual transaction.
|-
| Taproot Asset Chain HRP
| <tt>PSBT_GLOBAL_TAP_CHAIN_HRP = 0x71</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><string HRP></tt>
| The Human Readable Prefix of the Taproot Asset chain identifier as specified
in [[./bip-tap-addr.mediawiki|bip-tap-addr]].
|-
| Taproot Asset PSBT Version
| <tt>PSBT_GLOBAL_TAP_PSBT_VERSION = 0x72</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><byte version></tt>
| The version of the Taproot Asset PSBT format. Currently <code>0x00</code> is
the only known and supported version.
|}

===Input types===

{|
! Name
! <tt><keytype></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt> Description
! <tt><valuedata></tt>
! <tt><valuedata></tt> Description
|-
| Previous Asset Leaf
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_PREV_ID = 0x70</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><tlv_blob prev_asset_id></tt>
| The previous asset leaf (identified by
<code>prev_outpoint || asset_id || asset_script_hash</code>) in TLV format as
defined in [[./bip-tap.mediawiki#asset-leaf-format|bip-tap asset leaf format]].
|-
| Anchor Output Value
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_VALUE = 0x71</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><64-bit big endian int value></tt>
| The value in satoshis of the BTC level anchor output that committed to the
asset input being spent.
|-
| Anchor Output <code>pkScript</code>
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_PK_SCRIPT = 0x72</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><bytes pkScript></tt>
| The <code>pkScript</code> of the BTC level anchor output that committed to the
asset input being spent.
|-
| Anchor Output Sighash Type
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_SIGHASH_TYPE = 0x73</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><64-bit big endian int sighash type></tt>
| The 64-bit big endian unsigned integer specifying the sighash type to be used
for the BTC level anchor output that committed to the asset input being spent.
|-
| Anchor Output Taproot Internal Key 
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_TAP_INTERNAL_KEY = 0x74</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><32-byte xonlypubkey></tt>
| The X-only pubkey used as the internal key of the BTC level anchor output that
committed to the asset input being spent.
|-
| Anchor Output Taproot Merkle Root
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_TAP_MERKLE_ROOT = 0x75</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><32-byte hash></tt>
| The 32 byte Merkle root hash of the BTC level anchor output that committed to
the asset input being spent.
|-
| Anchor Output BIP-0032 Derivation Path
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_BIP32_DERIVATION = 0x76</tt>
| <tt><bytes pubkey></tt>
| The public key
| <tt><4 byte fingerprint> <32-bit little endian uint path element>*</tt>
| The master key fingerprint as defined by BIP-0032 concatenated with the
derivation path of the public key that was used for the BTC level anchor output
that committed to the asset input being spent. The derivation path is
represented as 32 bit unsigned integer indexes concatenated with each other.
Public keys are those that will be needed to sign this input.
|-
| Anchor Output Taproot Key BIP 32 Derivation Path
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_TAP_BIP32_DERIVATION = 0x77</tt>
| <tt><32 byte xonlypubkey></tt>
| A 32 byte X-only public key involved in this input. It may be the output key,
the internal key, or a key present in a leaf script.
| <tt><compact size uint number of hashes> <32 byte leaf hash>*
<4 byte fingerprint> <32-bit little endian uint path element>*</tt>
| A compact size unsigned integer representing the number of leaf hashes,
followed by a list of leaf hashes, followed by the 4 byte master key fingerprint
concatenated with the derivation path of the public key. The derivation path is
represented as 32-bit little endian unsigned integer indexes concatenated with
each other. Public keys are those needed to spend this output. The leaf hashes
are of the leaves which involve this public key. The internal key does not have
leaf hashes, so can be indicated with a <tt>hashes len</tt> of 0. Finalizers
should remove this field after <tt>PSBT_IN_FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS</tt> is
constructed.
|-
| Anchor Output Tapscript Sibling
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_TAPSCRIPT_SIBLING = 0x78</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><byte sibling_type><compact size num_bytes><bytes tapscript sibling preimage></tt>
| The preimage of the tapscript sibling that is on the same level as the Taproot
Asset commitment that was committed to in the anchor. If this is not present,
then the Taproot Asset commitment is the only script leaf in the tree.
|-
| Taproot Asset Asset
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ASSET = 0x79</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><tlv_blob asset></tt>
| The full input asset leaf that is being spent, in TLV format as defined in 
[[./bip-tap.mediawiki#asset-leaf-format|bip-tap asset leaf format]].
|-
| Taproot Asset Proof
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_ASSET_PROOF = 0x7a</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><tlv_blob proof></tt>
| The last proof of the input asset being spent, in TLV format as defined in 
[[./bip-tap-proof-file.mediawiki#file-serialization|
bip-tap-proof-file File Serialization]].
|}

===Output types===

{|
! Name
! <tt><keytype></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt> Description
! <tt><valuedata></tt>
! <tt><valuedata></tt> Description
|-
| Type
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_TYPE = 0x70</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><byte output_type></tt>
| A <code>uint8</code> value indicating the type of the virtual output. Valid
values are: 0x00 (<tt>Simple</tt>), 0x01 (<tt>SplitRoot</tt>),
0x02 (<tt>PassiveAssetsOnly</tt>), 0x03 (<tt>PassiveSplitRoot</tt>), see
description below.
|-
| Is Interactive
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_IS_INTERACTIVE = 0x71</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><byte 0x00/0x01></tt>
| A boolean value indicating whether the recipient of the output is aware of the
full asset leaf they are receiving (=interactive) or not (=non-interactive). In
the non-interactive case, the recipient will expect this output to be a split
output.
|-
| Anchor Output Index
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_OUTPUT_INDEX = 0x72</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><64-bit big endian int value></tt>
| The Bitcoin level anchor transaction output index this asset output is going
to be committed to.
|-
| Anchor Output Taproot Internal Key 
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_TAP_INTERNAL_KEY = 0x73</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><32-byte xonlypubkey></tt>
| The X-only pubkey used as the internal key of the BTC level anchor output that
will be committing to the asset output.
|-
| Anchor Output BIP-0032 Derivation Path
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_BIP32_DERIVATION = 0x74</tt>
| <tt><bytes pubkey></tt>
| The public key
| <tt><4 byte fingerprint> <32-bit little endian uint path element>*</tt>
| The master key fingerprint as defined by BIP-0032 concatenated with the
derivation path of the public key that will be used for the BTC level anchor
output that is committing to the asset output. The derivation path is
represented as 32 bit unsigned integer indexes concatenated with each other.
Public keys are those that will be needed to sign this input.
|-
| Anchor Output Taproot Key BIP-0032 Derivation Path
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_TAP_BIP32_DERIVATION = 0x75</tt>
| <tt><32 byte xonlypubkey></tt>
| A 32 byte X-only public key involved in this input. It may be the output key,
the internal key, or a key present in a leaf script.
| <tt><compact size uint number of hashes> <32 byte leaf hash>*
<4 byte fingerprint> <32-bit little endian uint path element>*</tt>
| A compact size unsigned integer representing the number of leaf hashes,
followed by a list of leaf hashes, followed by the 4 byte master key fingerprint
concatenated with the derivation path of the public key. The derivation path is
represented as 32-bit little endian unsigned integer indexes concatenated with
each other. Public keys are those needed to spend this output. The leaf hashes
are of the leaves which involve this public key. The internal key does not have
leaf hashes, so can be indicated with a <tt>hashes len</tt> of 0. Finalizers
should remove this field after <tt>PSBT_IN_FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS</tt> is
constructed.
|-
| Taproot Asset
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ASSET = 0x76</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><tlv_blob asset></tt>
| The full output asset leaf being created, in TLV format as defined in 
[[./bip-tap.mediawiki#asset-leaf-format|bip-tap asset leaf format]].
|-
| Taproot Asset Split Asset
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_SPLIT_ASSET = 0x77</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><tlv_blob split_asset></tt>
| In case the asset serialized in the <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ASSET</tt> is a split
root (<tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_IS_SPLIT_ROOT=0x01</tt>), this field houses the created
split asset at the root locator that contains the split commitment witness. This
is used for validation only and isn't committed to in any tree. If present the
split asset is encoded in TLV format as defined in 
[[./bip-tap.mediawiki#asset-leaf-format|bip-tap asset leaf format]].
|-
| Anchor Output Tapscript Sibling
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_TAPSCRIPT_SIBLING = 0x78</tt>
| None
| No key data
| <tt><byte sibling_type><compact size num_bytes><bytes tapscript sibling preimage></tt>
| The preimage of the tapscript sibling that is on the same level as the Taproot
Asset commitment that was committed to in the anchor. If this is not present,
then the Taproot Asset commitment is the only script leaf in the tree.
|}

===Values for <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_TYPE</tt>===

The <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_TYPE</tt> field describes the type of virtual output. This
type has an influence on how an asset needs to be signed or whether there is an
asset at all in an output.
The following values are defined:
<ul>
<li><b>Simple</b> (<tt>0x00</tt>) is a plain full-value or split output that is
not a split root and does not carry passive assets. In case of a split, the
asset of this output has a split commitment.
</li>
<li><b>SplitRoot</b> (<tt>0x01</tt>) is a split root output that carries the
change from a split or a tombstone from a non-interactive full value send
output. In either case, the asset of this output has a tx witness.
</li>
<li><b>PassiveAssetsOnly</b> (<tt>0x02</tt>) indicates that this output only
carries passive assets and therefore the asset in this output is nil. The
passive assets themselves are signed in their own virtual transactions and
are not present in this packet.
</li>
<li><b>PassiveSplitRoot</b> (<tt>0x03</tt>) is a split root output that carries
the change from a split or a tombstone from a non-interactive full value send
output, as well as passive assets.
</li>
</ul>

==Committing Taproot Asset virtual transactions into a BTC level anchor transaction==

The above section defined new fields for representing a virtual asset
transaction. This section explains how one or multiple virtual asset
transactions can be mapped to and be committed to in a single Bitcoin level
on-chain "anchor" transaction.

The following steps should be taken for committing one or more Taproot Asset
virtual transactions onto a single BTC anchor transaction:
# Sign the virtual transaction as described in [[./bip-tap.mediawiki|bip-tap]].
# Validate that each input in each virtual transaction has the necessary anchor information set (<code>PSBT_IN_TAP_ANCHOR_*</code>).
# Validate that each output in each virtual transaction has the necessary anchor information set (<code>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_*</code>).
# Validate that each virtual input's anchor information referencing the same previous outpoint (<code>PSBT_IN_TAP_PREV_ID.prev_outpoint</code>) is the same as all fields should refer to the same on-chain unspent output.
# Validate that each virtual output's anchor information referencing the same anchor output index (<code>PSBT_OUT_TAP_ANCHOR_OUTPUT_INDEX</code>) is the same as all fields should refer to the same on-chain output being created.
# For each input, add the last transition proof of the input asset to the BTC anchor PSBT input (field <code>PSBT_IN_TAP_PROOF</code>).
# For each unique anchor output index, create an output on the BTC anchor transaction:
## Merge all assets into a single Taproot Asset tree.
## If a Tapscript sibling is present for the BTC anchor output, verify it is not a Taproot Asset commitment.
## Calculate the merkle root hash from the merged Taproot Asset tree and the optional Tapscript sibling.
## Calculate the Taproot output key from the internal key and the merkle root hash, update the <code>pkScript</code> of the BTC anchor output.
# Create a single transition proof for each of the virtual transaction outputs and add them to the BTC anchor output, keyed by each asset's <code>script_key</code> (field <code>PSBT_OUT_TAP_PROOF</code>).

Once the BTC level anchor transaction has the extra information attached, it can
then be passed to all signers to produce the necessary signatures for getting it
finalized.

==Custom PSBT fields for BTC level anchor transactions==

===Input types===

{|
! Name
! <tt><keytype></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt> Description
! <tt><valuedata></tt>
! <tt><valuedata></tt> Description
|-
| Taproot Asset Proof
| <tt>PSBT_IN_TAP_PROOF = 0x70</tt>
| <tt><32 byte xonlyscriptkey></tt>
| The 32 byte X-only script key of the input asset being spent.
| <tt><tlv_blob proof></tt>
| The last proof of the input asset being spent, in TLV format as defined in 
[[./bip-tap-proof-file.mediawiki#file-serialization|bip-tap-proof-file File Serialization]].
|}

===Output types===

{|
! Name
! <tt><keytype></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt>
! <tt><keydata></tt> Description
! <tt><valuedata></tt>
! <tt><valuedata></tt> Description
|-
| Taproot Asset Proof
| <tt>PSBT_OUT_TAP_PROOF = 0x70</tt>
| <tt><32 byte xonlyscriptkey></tt>
| The 32 byte X-only script key of the input asset being spent.
| <tt><tlv_blob proof></tt>
| The new transition proof(s) for the new asset(s) created in this output.
|}

==Test Vectors==

Test vectors for [[Custom PSBT fields for Taproot Asset virtual transactions]]
can be found here:
* [[bip-tap-psbt/psbt_encoding_generated.json|PSBT encoding test vectors]]
* [[bip-tap-psbt/psbt_encoding_error_cases.json|PSBT encoding error test vectors]]

The test vectors are automatically generated by
[https://github.com/lightninglabs/taproot-assets/tree/main/tappsbt unit tests in
the Taproot Assets GitHub repository].

==Reference Implementation==

github.com/lightninglabs/taproot-assets/tree/main/tappsbt
