<pre>
  BIP: musig2-descriptors
  Layer: Applications
  Title: musig() Descriptor Key Expression
  Author: Ava Chow <me@achow101.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-musig2-descriptor
  Status: Draft
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2024-01-15
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document specifies a <tt>musig()</tt> key expression for output script descriptors.
<tt>musig()</tt> expressions take multiple keys and produce an aggregate public key using BIP 327.

==Copyright==

This BIP is licensed under the BSD 2-clause license.

==Motivation==

BIP 327 introduces the MuSig2 Multi-Signature scheme. It is useful to have a way for keys to be used
in a MuSig2 aggregate key to be expressed in descriptors so that wallets can more easily use MuSig2.

==Specification==

A new key expression is defined: <tt>musig()</tt>.

===<tt>musig()</tt>===

The <tt>musig(KEY, KEY, ..., KEY)</tt> expression can only be used inside of a <tt>tr()</tt>
expression as a key expression. The aggregate public key is produced by using the <tt>KeyAgg</tt>
algorithm on all KEYs specified in the expression after performing all specified derivation. As with
script expressions, KEY can contain child derivation specified by <tt>/*</tt>. A new aggregate
public key will be computed for each child index.

<tt>musig(KEY, KEY, ..., KEY)/NUM/.../*</tt> expressions are also allowed. The aggregate public key
is first computed as described above, then further BIP 32 derivation will be performed on it as
described in [[bip-musig2-derivation.mediawiki|BIP-musig2-derivation]]. As there is no aggregate private key, only unhardened
derivation from the aggregate public key is allowed, and thus the derivation steps following
the <tt>musig()</tt> expression cannot contain
<tt>/NUMh</tt> or <tt>/NUM'</tt> derivation steps nor <tt>/*h</tt>, or <tt>/*'</tt> child derivation.
For these <tt>musig()</tt> expressions, the KEY expressions contained within must be xpubs or derived from
xpubs, and cannot contain child derivation as specified by a <tt>/*</tt>, <tt>/*'</tt>, or <tt>/*h</tt>.

==Test Vectors==

TBD

==Backwards Compatibility==

<tt>musig()</tt> expressions use the format and general operation specified in
[[bip-0380.mediawiki|380]]. As these are a set of wholly new expressions, they are not compatible
with any implementation. However the keys are produced using a standard process so existing software
are likely to be familiar with them.

==Reference Implementation==

TBD

==Acknowledgements==

Thanks to Pieter Wuille, Andrew Poelstra, Sanket Kanjalkar, Salvatore Ingala, and all others who
participated in discussions on this topic.
