BIP: XXX
Title: Hybrid SPHINCS+ / secp256k1 Key Derivation for Quantum-Resistant Bitcoin Wallets
Author: DigiMancer3D
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Layer: Wallet
Created: 2026-05-26
License: BSD-3-Clause

Abstract

This BIP defines a practical hybrid post-quantum key derivation scheme that uses NIST-standardized SLH-DSA (SPHINCS+) together with the 3’s Company HE-SD (High-Entropy Seed Distillation) algorithm to produce standard secp256k1 private keys and Bitcoin addresses.

The process outputs raw key material that can be formatted with existing offline tools (e.g. bitaddress.org) into legacy WIF/public keys, plus fully-formed BIP-341 Taproot addresses. It is fully compatible with current Bitcoin software and designed to run on low-resource, air-gapped hardware.

An optional hybrid signing format is also defined.

Motivation

Quantum computers threaten ECDSA/Schnorr. While consensus-level migration (BIP-361) is future work, users and wallet developers need a deployable, reproducible method today for quantum-hardened paper wallets and cold storage that works with existing tools.

Specification

1. 3’s Company HE-SD (High-Entropy Seed Distillation)

3’s Company HE-SD is the deterministic high-entropy seed distillation algorithm defined in the SPX project:

https://github.com/DigiMancer3D/SPX

It internally uses SPX-QEC (Super Positioned Text - Quantum Entangled Compression) for lowest-entropy pattern detection and cleanup (current implementation performs pattern removal without token replacement).

2. SPHINCS++ Hybrid BTC Key Derivation

Given a role from the keychain:

1. Take the role’s secp256k1 private key bytes.
2. Compute SHA3-256(privkey || "SPHINCS++SEEDv1") → 512-trit ternary message.
3. Apply 3’s Company HE-SD (with SPX-QEC cleanup).
4. Sign the cleaned message with the role’s hybrid SPHINCS+ secret key (SLH_DSA_PURE_SHA2_128S).
5. Take the first 32 bytes of the SPHINCS+ signature as the new seed.
6. Derive a fresh secp256k1 private key from that seed (raw 32 bytes).
7. Generate:
   * Raw private key material (formatted offline via bitaddress.org.html into WIF and compressed public key)
   * BIP-341 Taproot address (internal key derived from the raw private key; TapLeaf commitment uses the raw private key itself)

A secondary “linked” key is also derived.

Output is a compact JSON .sphincs++ file containing addresses, raw keys, descriptors (generated but untested), and import commands.

3. Hybrid Signing (Optional)

* Standard 65-byte ECDSA compact signature (low-S, proper recovery ID) over the Bitcoin message hash.
* Hash (ECDSA signature + message) → 3’s Company HE-SD cleaned ternary message.
* Sign with hybrid SPHINCS+ secret key.
* Concatenate ECDSA sig + SPHINCS+ sig + padding → base58-encoded hybrid signature.

The ECDSA part remains verifiable with standard verifymessage.

4. File Formats

* .kchain — master keychain (JSON)
* .sphincs++ — per-role derived keys/addresses (JSON)
* .msg — signed messages (JSON)

Exact schemas are in the reference implementation.

Reference Implementation

Three small, self-contained C files (liboqs + jansson + OpenSSL):

* pqc_keygen_new.c — keychain generator
* pqc_sphincs_plus.c — SPHINCS++ hybrid derivation + Taproot address
* pqc_hybrid_signer.c — hybrid signing

All files, build instructions, and this BIP are maintained at:

https://github.com/DigiMancer3D/bip-xxx-sphincs-hybrid

The implementation is intentionally lightweight and runs on low-end/air-gapped hardware (Raspberry Pi class devices, old laptops, etc.).

Compatibility

* Legacy addresses: formatted via bitaddress.org (or equivalent) from raw keys.
* Taproot addresses: fully formed and tested (bc1p...).
* Confirmed working: Electrum (send/receive/sweep), bitaddress.org, Taproot, standard transaction flow.
* Descriptors: generated in output but not yet fully tested with Bitcoin Core.
* No consensus changes required.

Security Considerations

* SPHINCS+ is NIST FIPS 205 standardized and quantum-resistant.
* 3’s Company HE-SD + SPX-QEC adds deterministic entropy cleaning.
* All operations are offline and designed for air-gapped use.
* Final private keys are ordinary secp256k1 keys.

Rationale

This BIP provides a minimal, reproducible, and immediately usable path for quantum-resistant cold storage/paper wallets that integrates with today’s Bitcoin ecosystem.
