<pre>
  BIP: YYY
  Layer: Peer Services
  Title: Unrequested Transactions Processing
  Author: Antoine Riard <btc@ariard.me>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0XXX
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2024-09-05
  License: GPLv2
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP proposes a new mechanism to halt the processing of unrequested transations
received by a node from its bitcoin networks peers.

==Motivation==

Historically, nodes have been exchanging transactions on the Bitcoin peer-to-peer
network by sending an inv, and if the transaction has not been discovered and processed
yet by the other peer, sending a dedicated tx message.

Sending an unnannounced tx message has always been considered in conformity with
the protocol, however this behavior creates a denanonymization vector if leveraged
by mass connectors.

We can eliminate this concern by nodes rejecting unrequested transactions.

==Specification==

TODO: segment the protocol version by sub-categories of traffic class (eg tx, addr, block ?)

#. The protocol version of nodes implementing this BIP must be set to 70017 or higher.

#. After a node received a transaction from a peer
## If this transaction has been previously fetch with a getdata request, the node MUST process the transaction
## If this transaction has not been previously fetch with a getdata request, the node SHOULD reject the transaction

TODO: add a policy rule to disconnect protocol violation ?

==Backward compatibility==

This mechanism only applies to network peers signaling NODE_TXRELAY_V2 as a node service bit.

==Implementation==

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30572

==Copyright==

This BIP is licensed under the GPLv2.
