<pre>
  BIP:     82
  Title:   Hierarchy for Bitmessage Key Derivations
  Authors: Justus Ranvier <justus@monetas.net>
  Status:  Draft
  Type:    Informational
  Created: 2015-06-10
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP defines a logical hierarchy for deriving encryption and signing keys used for Bitmessage based on an algorithm described in BIP-0032 (BIP32 from now on) and purpose scheme described in BIP-0043 (BIP43 from now on).

This BIP is a particular application of BIP43 and is based on BIP44.

==Motivation==

The hierarchy proposed in this paper allows for Bitmessage users to derive all their keys from a single seed, which may be the same seed used for a Bitcoin wallet.

==Path levels==

We define the following 4 levels in BIP32 path:

<pre>
m / purpose' / identity' / stream' / address'
</pre>

Apostrophe in the path indicates that BIP32 hardened derivation is used.

Each level has a special meaning, described in the chapters below.

===Purpose===

Purpose is a constant set to 82' (or 0x80000052) following the BIP43 recommendation. It indicates that the subtree of this node is used according to this specification.

Hardened derivation is used at this level.

===Identity===

Identity is used to derive different key groups for identity seperation.

Identities are numbered from index 0 in a sequentially increasing manner.

===Stream===

Stream is used to derive different keys for use in different Bitmessage streams

Streams are numbered from index 1.

===Address===

Address nodes are numbered from index 0 in sequentially increasing manner. This number is used as child index in BIP32 derivation.

Hardened derivation is used at this level.

====Signing Keys====

The signing key for an address is the 0<sup>th</sup> child

<pre>S = m / purpose' / identity' / stream' / address' / 0</pre>

Public derivation is used at this level.

====Encryption Keys====

Bitmessage does not allow for arbitrary combinations of signing an encryption keys. In order to form a valid Bitmessage address, the keys must satisfy the condition that: <pre>ripemd160(sha512(concatenate(signing public key, encryption public key))</pre> contains a leading zero when the public keys are expressed in uncompressed X9.62 format.

Encryption keys are derived from signing keys using the following method:

# Derive a signing key per the procedure above: <pre>S</pre>
# Initialize a counter at 1: <pre>n</pre>
# Derive a candidate encryption key: <pre>E = m / purpose' / identity' / stream' / address' / n</pre>
# If the combination of S and E do not satisfy the acceptance criteria, increment n by one and try again
# Use the address version, signing key, encryption key, and stream number to construct a Bitmessage address per the Bitmessage protocol

Public derivation is used at this level.

==Compatible implementations==

* [[https://github.com/monetas/bmd|bmd]] is the reference Bitmessage implementation which uses this specification

==Reference==

* [[bip-0032.mediawiki|BIP32 - Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets]]
* [[bip-0043.mediawiki|BIP43 - Purpose Field for Deterministic Wallets]]
* [[bip-0044.mediawiki|BIP44 - Multi-Account Hierarchy for Deterministic Wallets]]
* [[https://bitmessage.org/wiki/Public_key_to_bitmessage_address|Public key to bitmessage address]]
