<pre>
  BIP: 143
  Title: Transaction Signature Verification for Version 0 Witness Program
  Author: Johnson Lau <jl2012@xbt.hk>
          Pieter Wuille <pieter.wuille@gmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2016-01-03
</pre>

== Abstract ==
This proposal defines a new transaction digest algorithm for signature verification in version 0 witness program, in order to minimize redundant data hashing in verification, and to cover the input value by the signature.

== Motivation ==
There are 4 ECDSA signature verification codes in the original Bitcoin script system: CHECKSIG, CHECKSIGVERIFY, CHECKMULTISIG, CHECKMULTISIGVERIFY (“sigops”). According to the sighash type (ALL, NONE, SINGLE, ANYONECANPAY), a transaction digest is generated with a double SHA256 of a serialized subset of the transaction, and the signature is verified against this digest with a given public key. The detailed procedure is described in a Bitcoin Wiki article. <ref name=wiki>[https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/OP_CHECKSIG]</ref>

Unfortunately, there are at least 2 weaknesses in the original transaction digest algorithm:

* For the verification of each signature, the amount of data hashing is proportional to the size of the transaction. Therefore, data hashing grows in O(n<sup>2</sup>) as the number of sigops in a transaction increases. While a 1 MB block would normally take 2 seconds to verify with an average computer in 2015, a 1MB transaction with 5569 sigops may take 25 seconds to verify. This could be fixed by optimizing the digest algorithm by introducing some reusable “midstate”, so the time complexity becomes O(n). <ref>[https://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?vulnId=CVE-2013-2292 CVE-2013-2292]</ref><ref>[https://bitcointalk.org/?topic=140078 New Bitcoin vulnerability: A transaction that takes at least 3 minutes to verify]</ref><ref>[http://rusty.ozlabs.org/?p=522 The Megatransaction: Why Does It Take 25 Seconds?]</ref>
* The algorithm does not involve the amount of Bitcoin being spent by the input. This is usually not a problem for online network nodes as they could request for the specified transaction to acquire the output value. For an offline transaction signing device ("cold wallet"), however, the unknowing of input amount makes it impossible to calculate the exact amount being spent and the transaction fee. To cope with this problem a cold wallet must also acquire the full transaction being spent, which could be a big obstacle in the implementation of lightweight, air-gapped wallet. By including the input value of part of the transaction digest, a cold wallet may safely sign a transaction by learning the value from an untrusted source. In the case that a wrong value is provided and signed, the signature would be invalid and no funding might be lost. <ref>[https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=181734.0 SIGHASH_WITHINPUTVALUE: Super-lightweight HW wallets and offline data]</ref>

Deploying the aforementioned fixes in the original script system is not a simple task. That would be either a hardfork, or a softfork for new sigops without the ability to remove or insert stack items. However, the introduction of segregated witness softfork offers an opportunity to define a different set of script semantics without disrupting the original system, as the unupgraded nodes would always consider such a transaction output is spendable by arbitrary signature or no signature at all. <ref>[https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki BIP141: Segregated Witness (Consensus layer)]</ref>

== Specification ==
A new transaction digest algorithm is defined, but only applicable to sigops in version 0 witness program:
  Double SHA256 of the serialization of:
     1. nVersion of the transaction (4-byte little endian)
     2. hashPrevouts (32-byte hash)
     3. hashSequence (32-byte hash)
     4. outpoint (32-byte hash + 4-byte little endian) 
     5. scriptCode of the input (serialized as scripts inside CTxOuts)
     6. value of the output spent by this input (8-byte little endian)
     7. nSequence of the input (4-byte little endian)
     8. hashOutputs (32-byte hash)
     9. nLocktime of the transaction (4-byte little endian)
    10. sighash type of the signature (4-byte little endian)

Semantics of the original sighash types remain unchanged, except the followings:
# The way of serialization is changed;
# All sighash types commit to the amount being spent by the signed input;
# <code>FindAndDelete</code> of the signature is not applied to the <code>scriptCode</code>;
# <code>SINGLE</code> does not commit to the input index. When <code>ANYONECANPAY</code> is not set, the semantics are unchanged since <code>hashPrevouts</code> and <code>outpoint</code> together implictly commit to the input index. When <code>SINGLE</code> is used with <code>ANYONECANPAY</code>, omission of the index commitment allows permutation of the input-output pairs, as long as each pair is located at an equivalent index.

The items 1, 4, 7, 9, 10 have the same meaning as the original algorithm. <ref name=wiki></ref>

The item 5:
*For P2WPKH witness program, the scriptCode is <code>0x1976a914{20-byte-pubkey-hash}88ac</code>.
*For P2WSH witness program,
**if the <code>witnessScript</code> does not contain any <code>OP_CODESEPERATOR</code>, the <code>scriptCode</code> is the <code>witnessScript</code> serialized as scripts inside CTxOuts.
**if the <code>witnessScript</code> contains any <code>OP_CODESEPERATOR</code>, the <code>scriptCode</code> is the evaluated script, with all <code>OP_CODESEPARATOR</code> and everything up to the last <code>OP_CODESEPARATOR</code> before the signature checking opcode being executed removed, serialized as scripts inside CTxOuts.

The item 6 is a 8-byte value of the amount of bitcoin spent in this input.

<code>hashPrevouts</code>:
*If the <code>ANYONECANPAY</code> flag is not set, <code>hashPrevouts</code> is the double SHA256 of the serialization of all input outpoints;
*Otherwise, <code>hashPrevouts</code> is a <code>uint256</code> of <code>0x0000......0000</code>.

<code>hashSequence</code>:
*If none of the <code>ANYONECANPAY</code>, <code>SINGLE</code>, <code>NONE</code> sighash type is set, <code>hashSequence</code> is the double SHA256 of the serialization of <code>nSequence</code> of all inputs;
*Otherwise, <code>hashSequence</code> is a <code>uint256</code> of <code>0x0000......0000</code>.

<code>hashOutputs</code>:
*If the sighash type is neither <code>SINGLE</code> nor <code>NONE</code>, <code>hashOutputs</code> is the double SHA256 of the serialization of all output value (8-byte little endian) with <code>scriptPubKey</code> (serialized as scripts inside CTxOuts);
*If sighash type is <code>SINGLE</code> and the input index is not greater than the number of outputs, <code>hashOutputs</code> is the double SHA256 of the output value with <code>scriptPubKey</code> of the same index as the input;
*Otherwise, <code>hashOutputs</code> is a <code>uint256</code> of <code>0x0000......0000</code>.<ref>In the original algorithm, a <code>uint256</code> of <code>0x0000......0001</code> is commited if the input index for a <code>SINGLE</code> signature is greater than the number of outputs. In this BIP a <code>0x0000......0000</code> is commited, without changing the semantics.</ref>

The <code>hashPrevouts</code>, <code>hashSequence</code>, and <code>hashOutputs</code> calculated in an earlier verification may be reused in other inputs of the same transaction, so that the time complexity of the whole hashing process reduces from O(n<sup>2</sup>) to O(n).

Refer to the reference implementation, reproduced below, for the precise algorithm:

<source lang="cpp">
  uint256 hashPrevouts;
  uint256 hashSequence;
  uint256 hashOutputs;
  
  if (!(nHashType & SIGHASH_ANYONECANPAY)) {
      CHashWriter ss(SER_GETHASH, 0);
      for (unsigned int n = 0; n < txTo.vin.size(); n++) {
          ss << txTo.vin[n].prevout;
      }
      hashPrevouts = ss.GetHash();
  }
  
  if (!(nHashType & SIGHASH_ANYONECANPAY) && (nHashType & 0x1f) != SIGHASH_SINGLE && (nHashType & 0x1f) != SIGHASH_NONE) {
      CHashWriter ss(SER_GETHASH, 0);
      for (unsigned int n = 0; n < txTo.vin.size(); n++) {
          ss << txTo.vin[n].nSequence;
      }
      hashSequence = ss.GetHash();
  }
  
  if ((nHashType & 0x1f) != SIGHASH_SINGLE && (nHashType & 0x1f) != SIGHASH_NONE) {
      CHashWriter ss(SER_GETHASH, 0);
      for (unsigned int n = 0; n < txTo.vout.size(); n++) {
          ss << txTo.vout[n];
      }
      hashOutputs = ss.GetHash();
  } else if ((nHashType & 0x1f) == SIGHASH_SINGLE && nIn < txTo.vout.size()) {
      CHashWriter ss(SER_GETHASH, 0);
      ss << txTo.vout[nIn];
      hashOutputs = ss.GetHash();
  }
  
  CHashWriter ss(SER_GETHASH, 0);
  // Version
  ss << txTo.nVersion;
  // Input prevouts/nSequence (none/all, depending on flags)
  ss << hashPrevouts;
  ss << hashSequence;
  // The input being signed (replacing the scriptSig with scriptCode + amount)
  // The prevout may already be contained in hashPrevout, and the nSequence
  // may already be contain in hashSequence.
  ss << txTo.vin[nIn].prevout;
  ss << static_cast<const CScriptBase&>(scriptCode);
  ss << amount;
  ss << txTo.vin[nIn].nSequence;
  // Outputs (none/one/all, depending on flags)
  ss << hashOutputs;
  // Locktime
  ss << txTo.nLockTime;
  // Sighash type
  ss << nHashType;
  
  return ss.GetHash();
</source>

== Example ==

  
  The following is an unsigned transaction:
    0100000002fff7f7881a8099afa6940d42d1e7f6362bec38171ea3edf433541db4e4ad969f0000000000eeffffffef51e1b804cc89d182d279655c3aa89e815b1b309fe287d9b2b55d57b90ec68a0100000000ffffffff02202cb206000000001976a9148280b37df378db99f66f85c95a783a76ac7a6d5988ac9093510d000000001976a9143bde42dbee7e4dbe6a21b2d50ce2f0167faa815988ac11000000
    
    nVersion:  01000000
    txin:      02 fff7f7881a8099afa6940d42d1e7f6362bec38171ea3edf433541db4e4ad969f 00000000 00 eeffffff
                  ef51e1b804cc89d182d279655c3aa89e815b1b309fe287d9b2b55d57b90ec68a 01000000 00 ffffffff
    txout:     02 202cb20600000000 1976a9148280b37df378db99f66f85c95a783a76ac7a6d5988ac
                  9093510d00000000 1976a9143bde42dbee7e4dbe6a21b2d50ce2f0167faa815988ac
    nLockTime: 11000000
  
  The first input comes from an ordinary P2PK:
    scriptPubKey: 2103c9f4836b9a4f77fc0d81f7bcb01b7f1b35916864b9476c241ce9fc198bd25432ac value: 6.25
    
  The second input comes from a P2WPKH witness program:
    scriptPubKey : 00141d0f172a0ecb48aee1be1f2687d2963ae33f71a1, value: 6
    private key  : 619c335025c7f4012e556c2a58b2506e30b8511b53ade95ea316fd8c3286feb9
    public key   : 025476c2e83188368da1ff3e292e7acafcdb3566bb0ad253f62fc70f07aeee6357
    
  To sign it with a nHashType of 1 (SIGHASH_ALL):
  
  hashPrevouts:
    dSHA256(fff7f7881a8099afa6940d42d1e7f6362bec38171ea3edf433541db4e4ad969f00000000ef51e1b804cc89d182d279655c3aa89e815b1b309fe287d9b2b55d57b90ec68a01000000)
  = 96b827c8483d4e9b96712b6713a7b68d6e8003a781feba36c31143470b4efd37
  
  hashSequence:
    dSHA256(eeffffffffffffff)
  = 52b0a642eea2fb7ae638c36f6252b6750293dbe574a806984b8e4d8548339a3b
  
  hashOutputs:
    dSHA256(202cb206000000001976a9148280b37df378db99f66f85c95a783a76ac7a6d5988ac9093510d000000001976a9143bde42dbee7e4dbe6a21b2d50ce2f0167faa815988ac)
  = 863ef3e1a92afbfdb97f31ad0fc7683ee943e9abcf2501590ff8f6551f47e5e5
  
  hash preimage: 0100000096b827c8483d4e9b96712b6713a7b68d6e8003a781feba36c31143470b4efd3752b0a642eea2fb7ae638c36f6252b6750293dbe574a806984b8e4d8548339a3bef51e1b804cc89d182d279655c3aa89e815b1b309fe287d9b2b55d57b90ec68a010000001976a9141d0f172a0ecb48aee1be1f2687d2963ae33f71a188ac0046c32300000000ffffffff863ef3e1a92afbfdb97f31ad0fc7683ee943e9abcf2501590ff8f6551f47e5e51100000001000000
  
    nVersion:     01000000
    hashPrevouts: 96b827c8483d4e9b96712b6713a7b68d6e8003a781feba36c31143470b4efd37
    hashSequence: 52b0a642eea2fb7ae638c36f6252b6750293dbe574a806984b8e4d8548339a3b
    outpoint:     ef51e1b804cc89d182d279655c3aa89e815b1b309fe287d9b2b55d57b90ec68a01000000
    scriptCode:   1976a9141d0f172a0ecb48aee1be1f2687d2963ae33f71a188ac
    amount:       0046c32300000000
    nSequence:    ffffffff
    hashOutputs:  863ef3e1a92afbfdb97f31ad0fc7683ee943e9abcf2501590ff8f6551f47e5e5
    nLockTime:    11000000
    nHashType:    01000000
    
  sigHash:      c37af31116d1b27caf68aae9e3ac82f1477929014d5b917657d0eb49478cb670
  signature:    304402203609e17b84f6a7d30c80bfa610b5b4542f32a8a0d5447a12fb1366d7f01cc44a0220573a954c4518331561406f90300e8f3358f51928d43c212a8caed02de67eebee
    
  The serialized signed transaction is: 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
  
    nVersion:  01000000
    marker:    00
    flag:      01
    txin:      02 fff7f7881a8099afa6940d42d1e7f6362bec38171ea3edf433541db4e4ad969f 00000000 494830450221008b9d1dc26ba6a9cb62127b02742fa9d754cd3bebf337f7a55d114c8e5cdd30be022040529b194ba3f9281a99f2b1c0a19c0489bc22ede944ccf4ecbab4cc618ef3ed01 eeffffff
                  ef51e1b804cc89d182d279655c3aa89e815b1b309fe287d9b2b55d57b90ec68a 01000000 00 ffffffff
    txout:     02 202cb20600000000 1976a9148280b37df378db99f66f85c95a783a76ac7a6d5988ac
                  9093510d00000000 1976a9143bde42dbee7e4dbe6a21b2d50ce2f0167faa815988ac
    witness    00
               02 47304402203609e17b84f6a7d30c80bfa610b5b4542f32a8a0d5447a12fb1366d7f01cc44a0220573a954c4518331561406f90300e8f3358f51928d43c212a8caed02de67eebee01 21025476c2e83188368da1ff3e292e7acafcdb3566bb0ad253f62fc70f07aeee6357
    nLockTime: 11000000

The new serialization format is described in BIP144 <ref>[[bip-0144.mediawiki|BIP144: Segregated Witness (Peer Services)]]</ref>
== Deployment ==

This proposal is deployed with Segregated Witness softfork (BIP 141) 

== Backward compatibility ==

As a soft fork, older software will continue to operate without modification. Non-upgraded nodes, however, will not see nor validate the witness data and will consider all witness programs, inculding the redefined sigops, as anyone-can-spend scripts.

== Reference Implementation ==

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7910

== References ==

<references>

== Copyright ==

This document is placed in the public domain.
