<pre>
  BIP: XYZ
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Emoji Seed Mnemonics for deterministic keys
  Author: Emoji Seed Dev Team <bip-devs@emojiseed.com>
  Comments-Summary: https://emojiseed.com/#readme
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0444
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2025-10-01
  License: MIT
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP describes a standardized mapping between the BIP-39 English wordlist 
and unique pairs of emoji characters to enable mnemonic phrases to be represented 
in a universally recognizable, language agnostic form, while remaining compatible 
with existing deterministic wallet standards.

This BIP describes the implementation of a mnemonic code or mnemonic sentence --
a group of easy to remember emojisets -- for the generation of deterministic wallets.

Today emoji characters are globally recognized symbols with strong visual memorability. 

This BIP extends BIP-39 mnemonics by introducing an emoji layer that preserves full 
backward compatibility with the underlying word list.

==Copyright==

This BIP directly inherits the MIT License from BIP-039.

==Motivation==

1. Preparing a data library for application teams.
2. Helping users who may struggle with word based laguage types.
3. Setting a industry respected standard for Emoji language mneumonics.
4. Starting a communnity around Emoji masking devices for seed phrases. 
5. Imprinting a unique, everlasting, dataset into the universal lexicon.

==Reference Implementation==

Reference implementation including wordlists is available from
- https://emojiseed.com/#readme
- http://github.com/emojiseed/emoji-mnemonic

