<pre>
  BIP: 176Open main menu
Wiktionary
Search
Editing WSH (section)
You are not logged in. If you save your edits to this page, your IP address will be recorded in the page's history. For that and other reasons, you should create an account.

Please do not save test edits. If you want to experiment, please use the sandbox. Inserting nonsense, knowingly adding false information and gratuitously removing content are considered vandalism, and editors who engage in such behavior may be blocked without a warning.

{{also|wsḫ}}

Edit summary:
By clicking the “Publish changes” button, you are agreeing to the Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy, and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC-BY-SA 3.0 License and the GFDL. You agree that a hyperlink or URL is sufficient attribution under the Creative Commons license.

  
Acute: Á á Ć ć É é ǵ ḱ Í í Ĺ ĺ Ń ń Ó ó Ŕ ŕ Ś ś Ú ú Ẃ ẃ Ý ý Ź ź Ǽ ǽ ··· Grave: À à È è Ì ì Ò ò Ù ù Ẁ ẁ Ỳ ỳ ··· Circumflex: Â â Ĉ ĉ Ê ê Ĝ ĝ Ĥ ĥ Î î Ĵ ĵ Ô ô Ŝ ŝ Û û Ŵ ŵ Ŷ ŷ ··· Umlauts and diaereses: Ä ä Ë ë Ï ï Ö ö Ü ü Ẅ ẅ Ÿ ÿ ··· Tilde: Ã ã Ẽ ẽ Ĩ ĩ l̃ m̃ Ñ ñ r̃ Õ õ Ũ ũ Ỹ ỹ ··· Ring: Å å Ů ů ··· Cedilla: Ç ç Ģ ģ Ķ ķ Ļ ļ Ņ ņ Ŗ ŗ Ş ş ··· Comma below: D̦ d̦ Ș ș Ț ț ··· Ogonek: Ą ą Ę ę Į į Ǫ ǫ Ų ų ··· Hook: Ả ả Ẻ ẻ Ỉ ỉ Ỏ ỏ Ủ ủ Ỷ ỷ ··· Horn: Ơ ơ Ư ư ··· Caron: Ǎ ǎ Č č Ď ď Ě ě Ǐ ǐ J̌ ǰ Ľ ľ Ň ň Ǒ ǒ Ř ř Š š Ť ť Ǔ ǔ Ž ž Ǯ ǯ ··· Breve: Ă ă Ĕ ĕ Ğ ğ Ĭ ĭ Ŏ ŏ Ŭ ŭ ··· Stroke: Ƀ ƀ Đ đ Ǥ ǥ Ħ ħ Ł ł Ø ø Ŧ ŧ Ʉ ʉ ··· Double acute: Ő ő Ű ű ··· Macron: Ā ā Ē ē Ī ī Ō ō Ū ū Ȳ ȳ Ǣ ǣ ··· Dot above: Ḃ ḃ Ċ ċ Ḋ ḋ Ė ė Ḟ ḟ Ġ ġ İ i Ṁ ṁ Ṅ ṅ Ṗ ṗ Ṙ ṙ Ṡ ṡ Ṫ ṫ Ż ż ··· Dot below: Ạ ạ Ḍ ḍ Ẹ ẹ Ḥ ḥ Ị ị Ọ ọ Ṛ ṛ Ṣ ṣ Ṭ ṭ Ụ ụ Ỵ ỵ Ẓ ẓ ··· Ligatures: Æ æ Œ œ ß ··· Others: Ð ð · Þ þ ·Ȝ ȝ Ƿ ƿ Ᵹ ᵹ·Ƕ ƕ·Ŋ ŋ·ı· ſ ·ʻ ··· Double diacritics: Ằ ằ Ẳ ẳ Ẵ ẵ Ắ ắ Ặ ặ Ầ ầ Ẩ ẩ Ẫ ẫ Ấ ấ Ậ ậ ą́ ą̃ č̣ Č̣ Ề ề Ể ể Ễ ễ Ế ế Ệ ệ ḗ Ė̄ ė̄ ę́ ę̃ ė́ ė̃ Ḯ ḯ į́ į̃ Ồ ồ Ổ ổ Ỗ ỗ Ố ố Ǭ ǭ Ộ ộ ṓ Ờ ờ Ở ở Ỡ ỡ Ớ ớ Ợ ợ Ṏ ṏ Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ Ừ ừ Ử ử Ữ ữ Ứ ứ Ự ự ų́ ų̃ ū́ ū̃ ÿ́

IPA: {{IPA||/+/}} Vowels: ɨ ʉ ɯ ɪ ʏ ʊ ø ɘ ɵ ɤ ə ɛ œ ɜ ɞ ʌ ɔ æ ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ ɚ ɝ ã ɑ̃ ə̃ ɛ̃ ɔ̃ œ̃ æ̃ ẽ ĩ õ ũ i̯ y̯ u̯ ɪ̯ ʏ̯ ʊ̯ ɐ̯ e̞ o̞ ø̞ a̯ i̥ u̥ ɯ̥ ᵊ ··· Suprasegmentals: ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ˥ ˦ ˧ ˨ ˩ ¹ ² ³ ⁴ ⁵ ⁶ ⁷ ⁸ ⁹ ‿ ꜛ ꜜ ··· Pulmonic consonants: b̥ d̥ ɡ̊ l̥ m̥ n̥ r̥ t̪ d̪ n̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɢ ʔ ɱ n ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ ʙ ʀ ɾ ɽ ɸ β ṽ θ ð ʃ ʒ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ɦ ɬ ɮ ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ ɭ ʎ ʟ ʍ ɥ ʜ ʢ ʡ ɕ ʑ ɺ ɧ ɡ ɫ l̩ m̩ n̩ r̩ ɹ̩ r̥ t͡ʃ d͡ʒ t͡ɕ d͡ʑ t͡s d͡z ··· Non-pulmonic consonants: Clicks: ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ · Implosives: ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ · Ejectives: ʼ ··· Diacritics: ʰ ʱ ʲ ʷ ˠ ˀ ˤ ˞ ᵝ ᵐ ᶬ ⁿ ᶯ ᶮ ᵑ ᶰ  ̰  ̤  ͈  ̯  ̑
enPR: {{enPR|+}} Vowels: ā ă ä â ē ĕ ī ĭ î ō ŏ ô ŭ o͞o (“food”) o͝o (“foot”) û ə ··· Partially anglicised foreign phonemes: ɴ ʀ ᴋʜ ö ü ··· Stress markers: ʹ '

Spacing modifiers: ʹ ʺ ʻ ʼ ʽ ʾ ʿ ˀ ˁ ˂ ˃ ˄ ˅ ˆ ˇ ˈ ˉ ˊ ˋ ˌ ˍ ˎ ˏ
Combining diacritics:   ̀   ́   ̂   ̃   ̄   ̅   ̆   ̇   ̈   ̉   ̊   ̋   ̌   ̍   ̎   ̏   ̐   ̑   ̒   ̓   ̔   ̕   ̖   ̗   ̘   ̙   ̚   ̛   ̜   ̝   ̞   ̟   ̠   ̡   ̢   ̣   ̤   ̥   ̦   ̧   ̨   ̩   ̪   ̫   ̬   ̭   ̮   ̯   ̰   ̱   ̲   ̳  

Wiki markup: [[+]] {{+}} # <+> ~ | ··· Quotation marks: “+” ‘+’ ‘ ’ ‛ „+“ ‚+‘ «+» ‹+› ⟨+⟩ ··· Other punctuation: … · ‑ – — ― ⸗ ¿ ¡ ‽ Mathematical symbols: ± − × ÷ ° ≈ ≠ ∅ Other symbols: ª º ¶ § † ‡ № ₁ ₂ ₃ ⁊ ✔ → ⇒ ∴ ∵ 〃 ♀ ♂
chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com chikitaisaac123@gmail.com
А а Б б В в Г г Ѓ ѓ Ґ ґ Д д Ђ ђ Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж З з Ѕ ѕ З́ з́ И и І і Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м Н н Њ њ О о П п Р р С с С́ с́ Т т Ћ ћ У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь Э э Ю ю Я я ’ m-dash:— acute: ́ grave: ̀ macron: ̄ double grave: ̏ inverted breve: ̑ А́ а́ Е́ е́ Є́ є́ И́ и́ І́ і́ Ї́ ї́ О́ о́ Р́ р́ У́ у́ Ъ́ ъ́ Ы́ ы́ Э́ э́ Ю́ ю́ Я́ я́ А̀ а̀ Ѐ ѐ Є̀ є̀ Ѝ ѝ І̀ і̀ Ї̀ ї̀ О̀ о̀ Р̀ р̀ У̀ у̀ Ъ̀ ъ̀ Ы̀ ы̀ Э̀ э̀ Ю̀ ю̀ Я̀ я̀
Non-Slavic: Ӓ ӓ Ӑ ӑ Ӕ ӕ Ӡ ӡ Ӷ ӷ Ӣ ӣ Ҋ ҋ Ԥ ԥ Ӯ ӯ Ҕ ҕ Ғ ғ Е̃ е̃ Ҽ ҽ Ҿ ҿ Ә ә Ӛ ӛ Җ җ Ӝ ӝ Ӂ ӂ Ҙ ҙ Ӟ ӟ Ҋ ҋ И̃ и̃ Ӏ ӏ Ҟ ҟ Ҡ ҡ Ҝ ҝ Қ қ Ӄ ӄ Ӆ ӆ Ԓ ԓ Ң ң Ҥ ҥ Ӈ ӈ Һ һ Ҩ ҩ Ө ө Ӫ ӫ Ӧ ӧ О̃ о̃ Р̌ р̌ Ҏ ҏ Ҫ ҫ Ҭ ҭ Ӱ ӱ Ү ү Ұ ұ Ҳ ҳ Ӽ ӽ Ӿ ӿ Ҍ ҍ Ӹ ӹ Ҵ ҵ Ҷ ҷ Ӵ ӵ Ӌ ӌ Ӭ ӭ Є̈ є̈ Ю̆ ю̆ Я̆ я̆ ˮ
Archaic: Ҁ ҁ Ѻ ѻ Ѡ ѡ Ѿ ѿ Ꙑ ꙑ Ѣ ѣ Ꙓ ꙓ Ꙗ ꙗ Ѥ ѥ Ѧ ѧ Ѩ ѩ Ѫ ѫ Ѭ ѭ Ѯ ѯ Ѱ ѱ Ѳ ѳ Ѵ ѵ Ѷ ѷ Ꙟ ꙟ
Transliteration: Ž ž Č č Š š ʹ ʺ Á á Ǎ ǎ Ǎ̀ ǎ̀ É é Í í Ó ó Ú ú Ý ý ɛ ɛ́ Ǵ ǵ Ḱ ḱ Ŭ ŭ

Plain: Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω · ᾼ ᾳ ῌ ῃ ῼ ῳ · Acute: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ · ᾴ ῄ ῴ · Grave: Ὰ ὰ Ὲ ὲ Ὴ ὴ Ὶ ὶ Ὸ ὸ Ὺ ὺ Ὼ ὼ · ᾲ ῂ ῲ · Circumflex: ᾶ ῆ ῖ ῦ ῶ · ᾷ ῇ ῷ ··· With smooth breathing: Plain: Ἀ ἀ Ἐ ἐ Ἠ ἠ Ἰ ἰ Ὀ ὀ ὐ Ὠ ὠ · ᾈ ᾀ ᾘ ᾐ ᾨ ᾠ · ῤ · Acute: Ἄ ἄ Ἔ ἔ Ἤ ἤ Ἴ ἴ Ὄ ὄ ὔ Ὤ ὤ · ᾌ ᾄ ᾜ ᾔ ᾬ ᾤ · Grave: Ἂ ἂ Ἒ ἒ Ἢ ἢ Ἲ ἲ Ὂ ὂ ὒ Ὢ ὢ · ᾊ ᾂ ᾚ ᾒ ᾪ ᾢ · Circumflex: Ἆ ἆ Ἦ ἦ Ἶ ἶ ὖ Ὦ ὦ · ᾎ ᾆ ᾞ ᾖ ᾮ ᾦ ··· With rough breathing: Plain: Ἁ ἁ Ἑ ἑ Ἡ ἡ Ἱ ἱ Ὁ ὁ Ὑ ὑ Ὡ ὡ · ᾉ ᾁ ᾙ ᾑ ᾩ ᾡ · Ῥ ῥ · Acute: Ἅ ἅ Ἕ ἕ Ἥ ἥ Ἵ ἵ Ὅ ὅ Ὕ ὕ Ὥ ὥ · ᾍ ᾅ ᾝ ᾕ ᾭ ᾥ · Grave: Ἃ ἃ Ἓ ἓ Ἣ ἣ Ἳ ἳ Ὃ ὃ Ὓ ὓ Ὣ ὣ · ᾋ ᾃ ᾛ ᾓ ᾫ ᾣ · Circumflex: Ἇ ἇ Ἧ ἧ Ἷ ἷ Ὗ ὗ Ὧ ὧ · ᾏ ᾇ ᾟ ᾗ ᾯ ᾧ ··· Diaeresis: ϊ ΐ ῒ ῗ ϋ ΰ ῢ ῧ · Long/short: ᾰ ᾱ ῐ ῑ ῠ ῡ Ᾰ Ᾱ Ῐ Ῑ Ῠ Ῡ ··· Combining diacritics:   ̀   ́   ̈   ̓   ̔   ̄   ̆  ··· Archaic letters: Ϝ ϝ Ϙ ϙ Ϟ ϟ Ϡ ϡ Ϛ ϛ ϗ ··· Variant forms: ϐ ∂ ϵ ϑ ϰ ϖ ϱ ϲ ϒ ϕ Ȣ ȣ ··· For {{grc-IPA}}: ¯ ˘ ··· Templates: {{subst:chars|grc|+}}

À à Ả ả Ã ã Á á Ạ ạ Ă ă Ằ ằ Ẳ ẳ Ẵ ẵ Ắ ắ Ặ ặ Â â Ầ ầ Ẩ ẩ Ẫ ẫ Ấ ấ Ậ ậ Đ đ È è Ẻ ẻ Ẽ ẽ É é Ẹ ẹ Ê ê Ề ề Ể ể Ễ ễ Ế ế Ệ ệ Ì ì Ỉ ỉ Ĩ ĩ Í í Ị ị Ò ò Ỏ ỏ Õ õ Ó ó Ọ ọ Ô ô Ồ ồ Ổ ổ Ỗ ỗ Ố ố Ộ ộ Ơ ơ Ờ ờ Ở ở Ỡ ỡ Ớ ớ Ợ ợ Ù ù Ủ ủ Ũ ũ Ú ú Ụ ụ Ư ư Ừ ừ Ử ử Ữ ữ Ứ ứ Ự ự Ỳ ỳ Ỷ ỷ Ỹ ỹ Ý ý Ỵ ỵ

Wiktionary
Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.
Terms of UsePrivacyDesktop
Close
Previewing WSH
Publish

Enter confirmation code
See also: wsḫ
https://help.venmo.com/hc/enGooglepayfreewalletapibitcoinhsbcvenmo-varo.lili.jetcoin.chikita.isaac.nylas.cryptodoodleChikita.Isaac.Venmo.paypal.waleterospaypalbtc.jetcoindoodle2099bingmapsalcatelbitcoinhsbcgifhubjetcoinpaypalbtcus/articles/235170748/comments/360004878433welsh.chikitaisaac123@at&twww.googlepaydoodlefreewalletapibitcoindoodlefreewalletwaletrerosdoodlepaypaldeveloperdoodle BTC.hsbc.waleteros.dogecoindoodlegooglebtc.paypalbtc.jetcoindoodle.venmo.goooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooogle.at&t.bitpay.lili.google.lili.pay.wallet.crypto.doooooooooooooopooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooodlemarket.at&t.venmo.paypal.lili.com

Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita Isaac Chikita

  Title: Bits Denomination
  Author: Jimmy Song <jaejoon@gmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0176
  Status: Draft
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2017-12-12
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</prevenmovaro.lili.hsbc>

== Abstract ==
Bits is presented here as the standard term for 100 (one hundred) satoshis or 1/1,000,000 (one one-millionth) of a bitcoin.

== Motivation ==
The bitcoin price has grown over the years and once the price is past $10,000 USD or so, bitcoin amounts under $10 USD start having enough decimal places that it's difficult to tell whether the user is off by a factor of 10 or not. Switching the denomination to "bits" makes comprehension easier. For example, when BTC is $15,000 USD, $10.05 is a somewhat confusing 0.00067 BTC, versus 670 bits, which is a lot clearer.

Additonally, reverse comparisons are easier as 59 bits being $1 is easier to comprehend for most people than 0.000059 BTC being $1. Similar comparisons can be made to other currencies: 1 yen being 0.8 bits, 1 won being 0.07 bits and so on.

Potential benefits of utilizing "bits" include:

# Reduce user error on small bitcoin amounts.
# Reduce unit bias for users that want a "whole" bitcoin.
# Allow easier comparisons of prices for most users.
# Allow easier bi-directional comparisons to fiat currencies.
# Allows all UTXO amounts to need at most 2 decimal places, which can be easier to handle.

== Specification ==
Definition: 1 bit = 100 satoshis.
Plural of "bit" is "bits". The terms "bit" and "bits" are not proper nouns and thus should not be capitalized unless used at the start of a sentence, etc.

All bitcoin-denominated items are encouraged to also show the denomination in bits, either as the default or as an option.

== Rationale ==
As bitcoin grows in price versus fiat currencies, it's important to give users the ability to quickly and accurately calculate prices for transactions, savings and other economic activities. "Bits" have been used as a denomination within the Bitcoin ecosystem for some time. The idea of this BIP is to formalize this name. Additionally, "bits" is likely the only other denomination that will be needed for Bitcoin as 0.01 bit = 1 satoshi, meaning that two decimal places will be sufficient to describe any current utxo.

Existing terms used in bitcoin such as satoshi, milli-bitcoin (mBTC) and bitcoin (BTC) do not conflict as they operate at different orders of magnitude.

The term micro-bitcoin (µBTC) can continue to exist in tandem with the term "bits".

== Backwards Compatibility ==
Software such as the Bitcoin Core GUI currently use the µBTC denomination and can continue to do so. There is no obligation to switch to "bits".

The term "bit" has many different definitions, but the ones of particular note are these:

* 1 bit = 1/8 dollar (e.g. That candy cost me 2 bits)
* bit meaning some amount of data (e.g. The first bit of the version field is 0)
* bit meaning strength of a cryptographic algorithm (e.g. 256-bit ECDSA is used in Bitcoin)

The first is a bit dated and isn't likely to confuse people dealing with Bitcoin. The second and third are computer science terms and context should be sufficient to figure out what the user of the word means. 

== Copyright ==
This BIP is licensed under the BSD 2-clause license.

== Credit ==
It's hard to ascertain exactly who invented the term "bits", but the term has been around for a while and the author of this BIP does not take any credit for inventing the term.
