<pre>
  BIP: 122
  Title: Creation of new testnet for scaling experiments
  Author: Chris Priest <cp368202@ohiou.edu>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2015-10-16
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP defines the creation of a new parallel text network called "ScaleNet",
which will be used to test the effects of massive scale upon the bitcoin
consensus protocol.

==Motivation==

Bitcoin was originally designed to be an experiment. With the increase in the market
cap, this experimental nature is decreased. There is considerable doubt whether
the Bitcoin consensus protocol can handle transaction rates orders of magnitude
higher than the network sees today.

==Specification==

The code for ScaleNet will resemble the current Bitcoin TestNet code in every way possible.
The only difference will be the elimination of the blocksize limit.

ScaleNet coins will have 0 monetary value, just like TestNet coins.

There will also be a ScaleNet faucet that will be used to automatically get free ScaleNet coins.

==ScaleNet spammer==

Along with the creation of the ScaleNet client, there will also be a piece of software
called the "ScaleNet Spammer Client". The purpose of this software is to simply send large amounts
of transactions to the network. This software works very much like how software used to "stress test"
the main Bitcoin network.

==Lessons Hopefully learned==

* What happens when the blockchain get too large to fit entirely onto a consumer grade hard drive?
* How will it be possible to run a full node when there are hundreds of GB of unconfirmed transactions in the mempool?
* What kind of special attention needs to go into mining gigantic blocks (>100MB) without through the roof orphan rates?

Each of these questions will be answered by ScaleNet. At some point in time
bitcoin will need to face these problems. Hopefully the insights learned
from ScaleNet will help drive a more data-driven approach to Bitcoin Development.
