<pre>
  BIP: 999
  Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
  Title: Proof of Transaction (PoT)
  Author: NullFunctor <NullFunctor@bitcoinvg.org>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0999
  Status: Draft
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2021-09-19
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document specifies <tt>Proof of Transaction (PoT)</tt> feature.
<tt>Proof of Transaction (PoT)</tt> makes the 51% attack more costly by forcing miners to take on more financial risk in order to mine.

==Copyright==

This BIP is licensed under the BSD 2-clause license.

==Motivation==

Recuce probability of 51% attack.

===<tt>Proof of Transaction (PoT)</tt>===

The current Bitcoin consensus allows for 51% attacking the chain by simply shadow mining with either luck or majority hashpower. The <tt>Proof of Transaction (PoT)</tt>
adds a <tt>Pay to All (PtA)</tt> feature that requires payment to a public address known to all in order to mine a block.

Requirements:
<pre>
- Pay to All (PtA) Address:       Paper wallet seed of "Proof of Transaction (PoT)" generates a publicly known COMMUNITY PUBLIC/PRIVATE key pair for all to gain access.
- No more than 10 transactions totaling at least 10 BTC to the (PtA) address. This prevents thousands of small amounts to try to reach the 10 BTC threshold.
- Each (PtA) locked for 1000 blocks.
</pre>

51% attack deterrent:
<pre>
With the above three above consensus requirements in place, an attacker must risk paying 10 BTC per block to a publicly known address to shadow mine. The locking for 1000 blocks ensures that 
the attacker cannot receive the funds in subsequent shadow mined blocks.
</pre>

Potential outcomes:
<pre>
- Forcing payment of 10 BTC per block will potentially slow down the rate at which blocks are mined. This will force Bitcoin to become a true Store of Value in which only larger amounts of BTC are transferred over longer time intervals.
- A tax on the rich, typically the more wealthy will Pay to Play (PtP) to have block progression.
- A natural LOTTO system is formed, those lucky enough to transfer the COMMUNITY funds to their PRIVATE address are the new owners of the BTC, however the top miners will statistically get their funds back over time.
- More mining decentralization; as 10 BTC become a "free for all" every block, miners will start to reject outside transactions containing transfers from the COMMUNITY address to increase their chance of getting the COMMNUNITY funds. 
  This forms a Gang of Greed (GoG) which may result in more miners showing up to try and grab the COMMUNITY funds.
</pre>


==Test Vectors==

TBD

==Backwards Compatibility==

Hard fork

==Reference Implementation==

BitcoinVG will add (PoT)

