<pre>
  BIP: <Leave Blank>
  Title: Quantum-Resistant Transition for Dormant P2PKH Addresses
  Author: AlthaafM
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2024-04-21
</pre>

==Abstract==
This proposal introduces a "Transition Window" for dormant Bitcoin addresses 
to register Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) public keys. This protects 
legacy funds (P2PK/P2PKH) from future Shor's algorithm attacks.

==Motivation==
Roughly 4 million BTC are stored in addresses with exposed public keys. 
A quantum attacker could derive private keys for these funds. We need a 
way for owners to "flag" their addresses as protected by a new QR signature.

==Specification==
Users will submit a "Commitment Transaction" containing:
1. The hash of a new SPHINCS+ or Dilithium public key.
2. A cryptographic proof of ownership of the legacy address.
3. A "Lock-Time" period to prevent immediate theft by bad actors.


==Reference Implementation==
The following Python 3 code implements the Merkle Tree Root generation 
used to secure dormant Bitcoin addresses. This commitment ensures that 
even with a quantum computer, the owner's "Root Identity" cannot be forged.

<pre>
import hashlib

def hash_pair(left, right):
    return hashlib.sha256(left + right).digest()

def build_merkle_root(leaves):
    current_level = leaves
    while len(current_level) > 1:
        if len(current_level) % 2 != 0:
            current_level.append(current_level[-1])
        next_level = []
        for i in range(0, len(current_level), 2):
            next_level.append(hash_pair(current_level[i], current_level[i+1]))
        current_level = next_level
    return current_level
</pre>
