<pre>
BIP: ???
Layer: Peer Services
Title: Compact Client Side Filtering for Light Clients
Author: Olaoluwa Osuntokun <laolu32@gmail.com>
        Alex Akselrod <alex@akselrod.org>
Comments: ???
Comments-URI: ???
Type: Standards Track
Created: 05-24-2017
License: CC0-1.0
</pre>

== Abstract ==

This BIP describes a new light client node type for Bitcoin as well as the
modifications to current full-nodes required to support this new type of light
client. The light client mode described in this BIP is meant to supersede BIP
37 as it provides a greater degree of privacy, utility, and also reduces the
resources required for full-nodes to service this new light client mode
compared to BIP
37<ref>https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0037.mediawiki</ref>.
The light client mode described in this BIP can be seen as a "reversal" of BIP
37<ref><https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2016-May/012636.html/ref>:
rather than the light clients sending filters to full-nodes, full-nodes send
filters to light clients. Unlike BIP 37, we don't utilize bloom filters.
Instead, we utilize a compact filter (more efficient than bloom filters) which
leverages Golomb-Rice coding for compression.  Additionally, blocks are
downloaded as a whole (from any source), rather than directly from peers as
fragments with merkle-branches proving their authenticity.

== Motivation ==

Light clients in Bitcoin provide applications with a less resource intensive
mechanism of validating the work of the most difficult chain and identifying
entries in the blockchain's log which are relevant to said application. In order
to accomplish the first, light clients download and verify the connectivity and
work of ''only'' the block headers of the chain. Block headers are a constant
80-bytes, resulting in minimal bandwidth even for very long chains. In order to
efficiently accomplish the second task (ascertaining relevant chain data) light
clients require a mechanism to learn of relevant data in blocks.

BIP 37 is currently the most widely used light client execution mode within
Bitcoin. In BIP 37, rather than fetching and fully validating all blocks in the
chain, the light client instead verifies all headers and sends bloom filters
containing relevant data to full-nodes. These full-nodes then service the light
client by querying data within a block against the loaded bloom filter, if a
transaction matches the filter, a merkle-branch for the matching transaction is
sent and distinctly the transaction itself is sent.

However, BIP 37 has several downsides. Bloom filtering as widely implemented
provides virtually ''zero'' privacy to wallets or other applications using this
mechanism
<ref>https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/763.pdf</ref><ref>https://jonasnick.github.io/blog/2015/02/12/privacy-in-bitcoinj/</ref>.
Additionally, applications are forced to carefully manage their false positive
rates in order to not completely give away their set of interested items.
Additionally, full-nodes can nearly undetectably lie by omission, causing a
denial of service which can lead to undesirable failure modes in applications
whose safety critically relies on responding to certain on-chain events. When
faithfully servicing BIP 37 light clients, full-nodes may incur significant I/O
and CPU resource usage due to maliciously crafted bloom filters, creating a
denial-of-service vector.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

== Design Rationale ==

In order to address the drawbacks of BIP 37 raised above, in this document we
propose an alternative chain filtering mechanism for light clients. Our
proposal sports a greater degree of privacy than BIP 37 as filtering is now
done on the client side. Clients download a deterministically generated filter
for a block and query it locally. If relevant items are found in the filter
then the ''entire'' block will be fetched. The decoupling of filter querying from
active communication with full-nodes enables light clients to fetch blocks from
''any'' source. Extremely privacy conscious light clients may opt to anonymously
fetch blocks using cryptographic techniques such a Private Information
Retrieval <ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_information_retrieval</ref>.

In order to reduce the size of the filter, we use a data structure capable of
probabilistic set membership. We elide the selection of the bloom filter data
structure in favor of utilising Golomb-Rice coding which allows us to generate
filters more compact than bloom filters which approach the theoretical minimum
size for probabilistic data structure.

Light clients operating using the method described in this document are able to
verify the authenticity of filters received, thereby eliminating the ability
for full-nodes to lie by omission. Such client side filtering also improves the
utility of light clients for generic applications beyond simple wallets and
usage of basic public key templates. 

Finally, full-nodes only need to construct filters ''once'' as they're
deterministically generated for each block. Once the index is built, no further
active processing is required to serve light clients. Servicing light clients
simply entails reading pre-computed filters and headers from disk and sending
them over the network.


== Preliminaries ==

Before we specify the details of our proposal, we'll first go over a few
preliminaries which will aid in the understanding our proposal.

By <code>[]byte</code> we refer to a slice (or vector) of bytes. This value is
typically expressed in C-like languages as an array of uint_8's.

By <code>Var-Int</code> we refer to the variable length integer encoding used
widely within the Bitcoin p2p protocol as an efficient way to encode the number
of items in a repeated series of items. The p2p message extensions in this
proposal will utilize this variable-length integer encoding in an identical
manner to the existing Bitcoin p2p messages.

By <code>siphash(k, n)</code> we refer to an invocation of the <code>SipHash</code>
pseudo-random function with <code>k</code> as the 128-bit key, and <code>n</code>
as the input to the PRF. We instantiate with the recommended parameters of
<code>c = 2</code> and <code>d = 4</code>.

We define the concept of an abstract bit stream instantiated by the function:
<code>new_bit_stream</code> The <code>bit_stream</code> has two functions that
operate on it, <code>unary_encode(stream, n)</code> and
<code>write_bits_big_endian(stream, n, k)</code> where <code>unary_encode(steam,
n)</code> emits n (an integer) to the stream in unary, and
<code>write_bits_big_endian(stream, n, k)</code> emits the lower <code>k</code>
bits of n to the stream using a big-endian binary encoding. For our unary
encoding, we encode a series of 1's followed by a terminating 0.

Whenever we reference sorting, we refer to an ascending sorted order. The items
in a sorted set should increase from smallest index to largest index.

We use a form of pseudo-code throughout the specification. In some areas we use
pattern-matching to specify the details of an algorithm:

   * <code>match(ITEM)</code> denotes a clause which pattern matches on
     <code>ITEM</code> (similar to a switch statement in imperative languages).

   * <code>Some</code> denotes a non-empty <code>ITEM</code>, equivalent to a
      non-nil pointer or value

   * <code>None</code> denotes an empty <code>ITEM</code>, equivalent to a nil
      pointer or value

== Specification == 

=== Compact Chain Filters === 

In this BIP, we propose that light clients be provided with compact filters
which succinctly encode the contents of blocks. Instead of bloom filters, we
instead employ a data structure which is a compressed version of the hashed
values of the contents of blocks. Throughout the document, we refer to this
data structure as a Golomb Coded Set (GCS). At a high level the set contains a
list of sorted fixed size values. These values are then compressed using a type
of run length encoding. In order to query the set, it must be decompressed. 

We will now define simple functions for encoding and decoding integers using
Golomb-Rice <ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golomb_coding#Rice_coding</ref>
coding. These functions will be used in the next section as a primitive in the
construction of our compact filters.

<pre>
golomb_encode(stream, n, k):
    let q = n >> k
    unary_encode(stream, q)
    write_bits_big_endian(stream, n, k)
</pre>

<pre>
golomb_decode(stream, k) -> int:
    let c = stream.read_bit()

    let n = 0
    while c == 0:
        n++
        c = stream.read_bit()

    let r = b.read_bits_big_endian(k)

    where read_bits_big_endian(k) decodes a fixed-length big-endian integer of
        k-bits 

    c*m + r
</pre>

With the two functions above, we're able to efficiently compress a single
integer using Golomb-Rice coding. In the next section, we'll put everything
together and use the primitives described above to construct our compact sets.

=== Golomb-Rice Coded Sets ===

Rather than insert items directly into our set, we instead first run the items
through a PRF. This creates a set of uniformly distributed values. If we then
sort each of these values, the ''delta'' between each of the values closely
resembles a ''Geometric Distribution''. We'll again leverage this fact to use
Golomb-Rice coding to compresses our set by only encoding the ''delta'' between
two successive elements in the set.

Golomb-Rice coded sets take two parameters: 
* <code>N</code> the number of items to be inserted into the set
* <code>P</code> a value which is computed as <code>1/fp</code> where <code>fp</code> is the desired false positive rate. 
    
Given these two parameters, we can now construct our set.

==== Set Construction ====

Set construction takes three parameters: <code>N</code>, <code>P</code> and
<code>L</code>
* where <code>L</code> is a list of the ''raw'' items we wish to insert into the set
* the type of <code>L</code> is assumed to be of <code>[]byte</code>

NOTE: <code>P</code> ''must'' be a power of two as we target the specialized case of
Golomb coding: Golomb-Rice coding.

Using <code>N</code> and <code>P</code> we compute <code>F = N * P</code>.
<code>F</code> constricts the range of the hashed values accordingly in order
to achieve our desired false positive rate.

In addition, to help optimize the algorithm, we use a fast range
algorithm<ref>https://lemire.me/blog/2016/06/27/a-fast-alternative-to-the-modulo-reduction/</ref>,
multiplying the hashed value by F and taking only the top 64 bits. This fairly
distributes the values over F without expensive division operations. In our
domain, the operation will use 64-bit integers. As a result, one may need to
manually compute the upper 64-bits of a 64-bits integers multiplication. This
can be done with fewer cycles on CPUs that have 128-bit registers. We use
64-bits, as this is the outputs size of siphash(2, 4).

The following routine computes the ''uncompressed'' set given the parameters
above:
<pre>
hashed_set_construct(N, P, raw_items, k): -> []uint64:
    let F = N * P

    let set_items = []
    for item in raw_items:
        let set_value = (siphash(k, item) * F) >> 64
        set_items.append(set_value)

    // Sorts in ascending order.
    set_items.sort()

    set_items
</pre>

Using the routine above, we can transform our set of (possibly heterogeneous
items) in to a list of uniformly distributed values. As a final step, these
values are then sorted. When sorting then items MUST be ordered in ascending
order.

==== Set Compression ====

Once the set of hashed items has been constructed (and sorted in ascending
order) we then use Golomb-Rice coding to ''compress'' the set by encoding the
''delta'' value between each successive element within the set. As these values
are uniformly distributed, the deltas between these values will be
Geometrically Distributed, meaning that Golomb-Rice coding will be optimal for
this use-case <ref>http://urchin.earth.li/~twic/Golombs_Original_Paper/</ref>.

The following routine describes the compression process:
<pre>
gcs_compress(sorted_set, fp) -> []byte:
    let stream = new_bit_stream()

    // P is equivalent to m, the size of a golomb code-word.
    let P = 1 << fp

    let last_value = 0
    for value in sorted_set:
        // Compute the difference between this value and the last value modulo
        // P.
        let remainder = (value - last_value) & (P - 1)

        // Compute the difference between this value and the last one, divided
        // by P. This is our quotient.
        let quotient = (value - last_value - remainder) >> fp

        // Write out the quotient value in unary into the bit stream.
        unary_encode(stream, quotient)

        // Finally, write the remainder into the bit stream using fp bits.
        write_bits_big_endian(stream, remainder, fp)

        // Track this value so we can use it compute the diff between this
        // value and the last.
        last_value = value

    stream.bytes()
</pre>

The routine above computes a ''compressed'' set using Golomb-Rice coding to
encode the ''delta'' between elements within the set. Unlike a bloom-filter,
this data-structure cannot be queried in its current form. Instead, one MUST
first perform the reverse computation to ''decompress'' the items in the set,
revealing the true values which can be queried against.

==== Set Querying/Decompression ====

Given a compressed Golomb-Rice coded set, one MUST first ''decompress'' the set
itself in order to query items which have been included within the set.
Decompression of a set follows the reverse procedure of encoding. To decode an
element, we'll decode the encoded quotient and remainder of encoded delta.
With the full delta re-constructed, we then ''add'' this value to the prior
value in order to reconstruct the full value. Following this procedure we can
incrementally decompress the set lazily without decompressing the entire
filter.

===== Querying for a Single Item =====

The following routing describes how one queries a compressed set for a ''single''
item:
<pre>
gcs_match(key: [16]byte, compressed_set: []byte, target: []byte, fp, N: int) -> bool:
    // First we'll map the item into the domain of our encoding.
    let item = (siphash(key, target) * (N * (1 << fp))) >> 64

    stream = new_bit_stream(compressed_set)

    // We initialize the initial accumulator to a value of zero.
    let last_value = 0

    // As the values in the set are sorted once the decoded values exceeds the
    // value we wish to query for, we can terminate our search early.
    for last_value < item:
        // Read the delta between this value and the next value which has been
        // encoded using Golomb-Rice codes.
        let decoded_value = golomb_decode(stream, fp)

        // With the delta computed, we can now reconstruct the original value.
        let set_item = last_value + decoded_value

        // If the values match up, then the target item _may_ be in the set, so
        // we return true.
        if set_item == item:
            true

        last_value = set_item

    // If we reach this point, then the item isn't in the set.
    false
</pre>

===== Querying Against a Set of Items =====

For most applications, the common case will be attempting to match a ''list'' of
items to the filter. In this case, we can perform a "zip" search against two
sorted lists: the step-by-step decompressed values of the set, and the list of
items we'd like to query.

The following routine will evaluate to ''true'' if ''any'' of the items in a
target set are ''maybe'' within the original set of items (pre encoding):
<pre>
gcs_match_any(key: [16]byte, compressed_set: []byte, targets [][]byte, 
              fp, N: int) -> bool:

    stream = new_bit_stream(compressed_set)

    // Once again, we'll map our set of target values into the domain our
    // encoding, sorting as a last step so we can zip through the values.
    let items = []
    for t in target:
        let item = (siphash(key, t) * (N * (1 << fp))) >> 64
        items.append(item)
    items.sort()

    // Set up a set of accumulator values that we'll use to zip down the two
    // filters.
    let last_set_val, last_target_val = 0, 0 
    last_target_val = items[0]
    let = 1

    // We'll keep running until one of the values matches each other. If this
    // happens, then we have a match!
    while last_set_val != last_target_val:
        // Perform a pattern match to decide which filter we'll need to
        // advance.
        match:
            case last_set_val > last_target_val:
                // If we still have items let, advance the pointer by one.
                if i < len(items):
                    last_target_val = items[i]
                    i++

                // Otherwise, we've ran our items in our target set, which
                // means nothing matched.
                false

            case last_target_val > last_set_val:
                // In this case, we'll advance the filter we're querying
                // against. This entails decompressing the next element in the
                // set.
                let decoded_value = golomb_decode(stream, fp)

                // Accumulate the decoded delta value to the current value in
                // order to retrieve the current set item.
                last_set_val += decoded_value

    // If we reach this point, the two items in the set matched!
    true
</pre>


=== Peer to Peer Network Extensions ===

With the procedures to construct, compress, and query the sets explained, we'll
now turn to the modifications to Bitcoin's p2p protocol required to support
this new operating mode.


==== Peer to Peer Service Bit ====

To start, we reserve a currently unutilized service bit. This is required as
light clients SHOULD ''preferentially'' peer to full-nodes that support the
features outlined in this BIP.

The 6th service bit will now be dedicated to signaling support for the
features described within this BIP: 
* <code>SFNodeCF = 1 << 6</code>

==== Filter Types ====

As this framework for client-side chain filtering is meant to be generic, in
this document we define two ''filter types''. A filter type denotes both the
construction/querying for a filter as well as the contents of the filter.

At the time of writing of this BIP, two filter types are defined:
* Normal (<code>0x00</code>)
* Extended (<code>0x01</code>)

A <code>Normal</code> filter is intended to contain all the items that a light client
needs to sync a basic Bitcoin wallet. In order to facilitate this use-case, for
each transaction, normal filters contain:
* The outpoints of each input within a transaction.
* The data-pushes contained within the public key script of each output within the transaction.
* The <code>txid</code> of the transaction itself.

An <code>Extended</code> filter contains extra data that is meant to facilitate the
adoption of more advanced smart contracting applications by this BIP. For each
transaction found in a block, an <code>Extended</code> filter contains:
* Each item within the witness stack of an input (if the input has a witness).
* Each data push of the signature script of an input.

Notably, this construction does not currently interpret P2SH scripts or witness
scripts to extract data pushes from them; however, future filter types may be
designed to do so.

==== Filter Construction ====

In order to ensure that filters are deterministically generated, we will use
the ''first'' <code>16-bytes</code> of the <code>block hash</code> of a Bitcoin
block as the key to our <code>siphash</code> function. Full-nodes that support
this BIP SHOULD treat the set of filters as an additional index of the
blockchain. Once a new block arrives, both filter types SHOULD be constructed,
and stored on disk. Full nodes MAY opt to dynamically construct the filters at
runtime, trading off space for additional computation. Full-nodes that update
to support this BIP once already synced, SHOULD upon start-up, re-index the
chain, constructing filters for each block from genesis to current chain tip.

When indexing input and output scripts, we only index the push datas in the
script. The function <code>extract_push_datas</code> returns a vector of byte
slices that contain any pushed data found within the script <ref>. Pushed datas
are the byte slices following: <code>OP_PUSHDATA1</code>,
<code>OP_PUSHDATA2</code>, <code>OP_PUSHDATA4</code>, and the opcodes numbered
<code>1</code> to <code>75</code>.  The set of returned values includes
<code>OP_O</code>, but excludes <code>OP_1 - OP_16</code>.  <pre>OP_O</pre>
MUST be emitted as an empty byte slice.  For the complete set of opcodes
defined in Script, we refer the reader to
<ref>https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Script</ref>.

Given a Bitcoin block, a full-node MUST construct a <code>Normal</code> compact
filter as follows:
<pre>
construct_normal_gcs_filter(block, fp) -> []byte:
    let siphash_key = block.hash()[:16]

    let P = 1 << fp

    let raw_items = []
    for tx in block.transactions:
        let txid = tx.hash()
        raw_items.append(txid)

        for output in tx.outputs:
            let output_bytes = extract_push_datas(output.script)
            for output_byte in output_bytes:
                raw_items.append(output_byte)

        if tx.is_coinbase():
            continue

        for input in tx.inputs:
            // Inputs serialized as they are on the wire in transactions.
            // Input index serialized in little-endian.
            let input_bytes = input.hash || input.index
            raw_items.append(input_bytes)

    let N = len(raw_items)
    let F = N * P

    let hashed_items = []
    for raw_item in raw_items:
        let hashed_item = (siphash_key(siphash_key, raw_item) * F) >> 64
        hashed_items.append(hashed_item)

    hashed_items.sort()

    gcs_compress(hashed_items, fp)
</pre>

Given a Bitcoin block, a full-node MUST construct an <code>Extended</code>
compact filter as follows:
<pre>
construct_extended_gcs_filter(block, fp) -> []byte:

    let siphash_key = block.hash()[:16]

    let P = 1 << fp

    let raw_items = []
    for tx in block.transactions:
        if tx.is_coinbase():
           continue

        for input in tx.inputs:
            for wit_elem in input.witness:
                raw_items.append(wit_elem)

            let sig_script_pushes = extract_push_datas(input.sig_script)
            for push in sig_script_pushes:
                raw_items.append(push)

    let N = len(raw_items)
    let F = N * P

    let hashed_items = []
    for raw_item in raw_items:
        let hashed_item = (siphash_key(siphash_key, raw_item) * F) >> 64
        hashed_items.append(hashed_item)

    // Sorted in ascending order.
    hashed_items.sort()

    gcs_compress(hashed_items, fp)
</pre>

==== Filter Capability Querying ====

As it's feasible that in the future, this document is extended to encompass
additional filter encoding algorithms or filter contents, we define a new p2p
message that allows light clients to ascertain which filters a node supports.

The <code>getcftypes</code> message is an ''empty message'' whose command string is:
<code>getcftypes</code>

A full-node that receives a <code>getcftypes</code> message MUST respond with a
<code>cftypes</code> message which is defined as follows:

{| class="wikitable"
! Field Size
! Description
! Data Type
! Comments
|-
| Var-Int
| NumFilters
| uint64
| The number of supported filters.
|-
| NumFilters
| SupportedFilters
| [NumFilterBytes]byte
| A byte slice with each byte denoting a supported filter type
|}


==== Compact Filter Header Chain ====

As the filters described in this BIP ''are not'' consensus critical, meaning
each filter is ``not`` validated by full-nodes and committed into blocks by
miners, we require an alternative (albeit less-binding) method to allow light
clients to ''identify'' and ''reject'' invalid filters. The purely p2p solution
to this problem is to obtain a deterministic hash-chain of ''each'' filter.
This hash chain or "filter header chain" is similar to the regular Bitcoin
headers in that it allows a light client to verify the ''authenticity'' of a
received
filter.

The filter header chain for a particular filter type is described by the
following recurrence:
<pre>
filter_header(n: uint) -> [32]byte = 
   // The zero hash is 32 bytes of 0's.
   let zero_hash [32]byte = {0*32}

   if n == 0:
       double-sha-256(genesis_block.prevblock || filter(0))

   match filter(n): 
      // If the filter isn't empty, then we hash the filter itself into the
      // header chain.
      case Some:
          double-sha-256(filter_header(n-1) || double-sha-256(filter(n)))

      // Otherwise, if the filter is empty (created from a block with a single
      // coinbase transaction whose output script contains no push datas), then
      // we'll hash the zero_hash.
      case None:
          double-sha-256(filter_header(n-1) || double-sha-256(zero_hash))

   where filter(n) is the filter for block height n
</pre>

The filter header for the genesis block uses the hash stored in the prevblock
field of the genesis block header itself, as there's no prior filter header
(by definition).

Due to the nature of filter construction, it's possible to construct a block
such that an "empty" filter will be produced. This is the case of a coinbase
transaction that has no data pushes in its output script. In this case, the
"hash" of said filter is simply "32 zeroes". 


We now introduce two new messages to support the fetching and verification of
the filter header chain by light clients. 

The <code>getcfheaders</code> message is defined as follows:

{| class="wikitable"
! Field Size
! Description
! Data Type
! Comments
|-
| Var-Int
| NumBlockLocators
| uint64
| Number of block locators.
|-
| NumBlockLocators * 32
| BlockLocatorHashes
| [NumBlockLocators][32]byte
| Block locator hashes, with the same semantics as in <code>getheaders</code>.
|-
| 32
| HashStop
| [32]byte
| Hash to stop at.
|-
| 1
| FilterType
| byte
| Type of filter header being requested.
|}

The <code>BlockLocators</code> within the message are to be interpreted
identically to the <code>BlockLocators</code> within Bitcoin's
<code>getheaders</code> and <code>getblocks</code> messages <ref>https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_documentation</ref>.

The <code>cfheaders></code> message MUST be sent in response to a
<code>getcfheaders</code> message for a particular block hash. The
<code>cfheaders</code> message is defined as follows:

{| class="wikitable"
! Field Size
! Descriptions
! Data Type
! Comments
|-
| 32
| StopHash
| []byte
| Block hash for the last filter header returned, for locating the filter headers in the blockchain.
|-
| 1
| FilterType
| byte
| Byte identifying the type of filter headers being returned.
|-
| Var-Int
| NumHeaders
| uint64
| Hash to stop at.
|-
| NumHeaders * 32
| HeaderHashes
| [NumHeaders][32]byte
| Slice of filter headers.
|}

=== Compact Filters ===

The last set of messages we introduce are for ''fetching'' the compact filters
themselves. Light clients can SHOULD use these two messages to request a
compact filter for a particular block hash.

The <code>getcfilter</code> message is defined as follows:

{| class="wikitable"
! Field Size
! Description
! Data Type
! Comments
|-
| 32
| BlockHash
| [32]byte
| Block hash of the Bitcoin block for which the client wishes to fetch a filter.
|-
| 1
| FilterType
| byte
| Byte identifying the type of filter requested.
|}

The <code>cfilter</code> message MUST be sent in response to a
<code>getcfilter</code> message for a particular block hash.The
<code>cfilter</code> message is defined as follows:
{| class="wikitable"
! Field Size
! Description
! Data Type
! Comments
|-
| 32
| BlockHash
| [32]byte
| Block hash of the Bitcoin block for which the filter is being returned.
|-
| 1
| FilterType
| byte
| Byte identifying the type of filter being returned.
|-
| Var-Int
| NumFilterBytes
| uint64
| A variable length integer encoding the number of bytes of the filter in the following field.
|-
| NumFilterBytes
| FilterBytes
| [NumFilterBytes]byte
| The raw compressed compact filter for this block.
|}

The <code>BlockHash</code> field is included in both messages as this allows
easily matching requests against responses, as the responses aren't
self-identifying like block headers are (via own hash).

The parameters <code>N</code> (the number of elements in the filter) and
<code>P</code> (<code>1 << false_positive_rate</code>) are required by the light
client in order to properly incrementally decode, query, and validate
(reconstruct from Bitcoin block) a compact filter. The parameter <code>N</code>
cannot be known ahead of time, therefore we define the serialization of a
compact filter of type <code>0x00</code> and <code>0x01</code> as:
<pre>
N || raw_filter_bytes
</pre>
where <code>N</code> is serialized as a 32-bit big-endian integer.

However, there exists a special case of a <code>null</code> filter. This this
case an empty byte slice is transmitted rather than consuming
<code>4-bytes</code> to encode the size of zero.

However, as the parameter <code>P</code> ''MUST'' be globally agreed upon (for
a particular filter type), we define this value ''statically'' for filter
types: <code>0x00</code> and <code>0x01</code>. For the two aforementioned
filter types, the false positive rate MUST be: <code>20</code>, meaning the
parameter <code>P</code> is: <code>2^20</code>, meaning <code>fp=20</code>.
This value was chosen as during simulations it was the value that minimized the
bandwidth utilized by the expected number of blocks downloaded due to false
positives, and the bandwidth used to download the filters themselves. The code
along with a demo used for the parameter tuning can be found [here https://github.com/Roasbeef/bips/blob/83b83c78e189be898573e0bfe936dd0c9b99ecb9/gcs_light_client/gentestvectors.go]


=== Protocol Version Bump ===

As this BIP defines new peer-to-peer behavior, we bump the protocol version by
one in order to distinguish the newly defined behavior. Full-nodes implementing
this BIP should advertise a protocol version of: <code>70016</code>.

== New Wallet Capabilities Enabled ==

The new light client mode enables wallet to maintain a very compact client-side
index of (possibly) the entire chain. Such an index provides a great degree of
utility for wallets, as they're now able to perform tasks such as private key
imports and full HD-seed imports without the need of a trusted third-party
server. Additionally, the compact client-side chain index also opens up the
door to smart contract applications which require agent action in response to
on-chain events. Examples of such applications include Lightning.

== Mathematical Background == 

In the following sections, borrowing from techniques typically used in image
and video processing, we describe our chosen encoding for the hash fingerprints
of the items in our set of relevant items. In order to compress the items of
the set in a lossy manner (creating data-structure capable of probabilistic set
membership), we utilize Golomb-Rice codes to encode the ''delta'' between
successive hash items within our set. This results in a very compact
probabilistic set-membership structure.

With a goal of building relevant initiation in the minds of the readers of this
document, we first start from the bottom of the abstraction ladder, describing
the fundamental components our set encoding relies on.


=== Run-Length Encoding ===

Run-Length Encoding (or RLE) is typically used in the video/image processing
space to losslessly compresses images, or video frames. RLE works by ''omitting''
the encoding of ''repeated'' values in a data stream. This achieves lossless
compression as repeated items simply aren't transmitted. Instead, a value which
represents the ''number of times'' a value repeats is transmitted.

Typically RLE takes the form of encoding repeated values in a ''binary'' stream.
A simple RLE scheme works as follows:
* Encode the run length (number of occurrences) of 0's using <code>k</code> bits.
** <code>k</code> acts as fixed length encoding for the length of a run.
** This value acts as the maximum encodable run-length.
* Transmission of runs of 1's is omitted.
* Two 1's in a row are denoted by a zero-length run of zero.

As an example, consider the following sequence of bits: 
<pre>
{0}^14 1 {0}^9 11 {0}^20 1 {0}^30 11 {0}^11
</pre>

The RLE of the bit stream above would be:  

<pre>
1110 1001 0000 1111 0101 1111 1111 0000 0000 1011
</pre>

RLE allows one to efficiently encode a data stream in a lossless manner. Due to
the encoding of runs, RLE works best when encoding a set with a high degree of
redundancy. A careful reader will notice that by using a fix-length encoding
for the size of runs, efficiency is lost. Therefore, rather than using a
fix-length encoding for the size of a run, we can instead use a ''variable''
length encoding for the size of a run. This allows us to compress runs of a
large size. To do so, we'll now turn to Golomb-Rice Coding.

=== Golomb-Rice Coding ===

RLE works well when encoding a data stream that has a high degree of redundancy.
However, in our case due to the hashing of items within the compact filter,
we'll be dealing with items that are ''uniformly distributed''. We can use this
fact to leverage a more efficient encoding scheme based on the distribution of
the length of a run. The [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_distribution
Geometric Distribution] represents the probabilities of a number of failures
before the first success in a series of Bernoulli trials (yes/no experiments).
If our values are i.i.d (independent, identically distributed) distributed of
the run-length <code>r</code> can be represented as [6]:
<pre>
P(r = n) = p^n * (1-p)
</pre>
Intuitively, this calculates the probability of N zeroes (a run) followed by a
single 1 (end of a run). Golomb coding takes advantage of this relationship to
efficiently encode integers using a two-tuple. Given a group size of <code>m</code> one
can encode an integer as:
<pre>
n = (q*m) + r
  where q is (n / m)
   and  r is n % m
</pre>

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golomb_coding Golomb Coding] encodes the two
values (<code>q</code> and <code>r</code> for a given integer <code>n</code> as
a two-tuple. The first value <code>q</code> is encoded using ''unary'', and the
second value <code>r</code> is encoded using a fixed-length series of bits. If
<code>m = 2^k</code> for some <code>k</code> then this encoding is a
specialized sub-set of Golomb encoding known as Golomb-Rice encoding. In this
case, <code>r</code> (the remainder) is the <code>k</code>
least-significant-bits of <code>n</code>

In this case "runs", can be seen as the number of multiples of <code>m</code>
that divide into <code>n</code> If an encoded integer is close to the value of
<code>m</code> then few bits (in unary) will be used to encode each value.

To aid in understanding we provide the following examples of using Golomb-Rice
encoding to code integers given <code>m=5</code>
<pre>
n  = (q, r) = c
0  = (0, 0) = 0 00
1  = (0, 1) = 0 01
2  = (0, 2) = 0 10
3  = (0, 3) = 0 110
4  = (0, 4) = 0 111
5  = (1, 0) = 10 00
6  = (1, 1) = 10 01
7  = (1, 2) = 10 10
8  = (1, 3) = 10 110
9  = (1, 4) = 10 111
10 = (2, 0) = 110 00
</pre>

The <code>P</code> value can also be interpreted as the parameter to our
Geometric Distribution.  Intuitively, to achieve a false positive rate of 1/32
(1/2^5), in a series of queries of items which ''aren't'' in the set, we expect
to receive a "NO" (false) 32 times, before getting a "YES" (true, our false
positive). Once again, <code>P</code> MUST be a power of two.


== Backwards Compatability ==

This light client protocl is NOT backwards compatible with BIP 37. Full nodes
MAY implement both protocols to serve both types of light clients.


== Implementation Notes ==

This filter header chain SHOULD be utilized by light clients to gain a greater
degree of security against bamboozling full-nodes during their initial chain
sync. In addition to fetching all the bitcoin headers, light clients
implementing this BIP SHOULD also fetch all the ''filter headers'' from
''each'' of their connected peers. With these headers, light clients SHOULD
efficiently detect nodes that advertise a conflicting filter chain history. To
do this, light clients MUST ensure that all nodes return the ``same` filter
header hash for a particular block header hash. 

Light clients MAY use the filter header chain to verify purported filter
authenticity when fetching the next set of headers from chain tip. Light
clients MAY use the following algorithm to more efficiently verify the
authenticity of filters (the naive version would fetch the entire filter from
each peer, this version saves bandwidth):

<pre>
verify_from_tip(tip_block_hash: [32]byte):
    let filter_types = {supported_filter_types...}
    let connected_peers = {list_of_connected_full_nodes...}

    for filter_type in filter_types:

        let filter_headers = set()
        for peer in connected_peers:
            let filter_header = peer.fetch_filter_header(tip_block_hash)
            filter_headers.insert(filter_header)

        if len(filter_headers) != 1:
            // Peers have conflicting filters. The light client should fetch
            // each unique filter from the set of peers AND fetch the block. The
            // light client can then verify which filter header is correct, and
            // BAN the offending peers.

        // Otherwise, syncing continues as normal: fetch filter to see if it
        // matches any relevant items.
</pre>

Light clients MAY persistently commit all filter headers to disk, as when
lazily fetching filters (due to a historical re-scan or chain analysis),
they're able to verify the authenticity of any fetched filters.

Full-nodes MAY persistently compute and persist the filter header chain
on-disk, just as the regular filters.

Zero-length filters are sent without an <code>N</code> value, allowing us to save
<code>4-bytes</code>. Clients are able to verify that a filter will be
<code>null</code> before requesting it (as it will just be the prior filter
header hashed with zero bytes). Clients can take this fact into account in
order to save a round trip for <code>null</code> headers.

Light clients implementing this proposal SHOULD utilize the
<code>sendheaders</code> message. This allow quicker syncing from tip, as rather
than sending an <code>inv</code> to announce a new blocks, nodes will instead
directly send the <code>headers</code> message. With this, nodes can save a
round-trip and immediately request
<code>cfheaders</code> from each of their connected peers before ultimately
fetching the filter itself.

Light client syncing MAY be run in reverse, meaning fetching the regular
Bitcoin and filter headers from the ''end'' of the chain and working backwards.
This allows a client to nearly ''instantly'' be useable if an application doesn't
require immediate access to historical filter data.

If fetching blocks directly over the p2p network (rather than via a distinct
channel), light clients SHOULD fetch blocks from multiple peers in order to
mitigate transaction intersection analysis.

Full nodes serving the light clients described in this BIP can be implemented
in a completely ''stateless'' manner. Implementations can also make a
space/time tradeoff by only holding filters on disk to some particular block
horizon. If a filter beyond this horizon is requested, then it can be
reconstructed in real time. This allows nodes to save on disk-space, as it's
likely the older filters would only be fetched for historical rescans. It is
also likely that the past few hundred filters will be fetched mostly frequently
by smaller devices (phones, laptops, etc) periodically coming back online after a
period of inactivity.

It is possible to implementations of this BIP to serve ''other''
implementations to a degree. All headers (regular bitcoin, regular, extended)
can be served, and also any on-disk filters can also be served to other light
clients.

Key import and rescan: with lazy <code>filters</code> fetching, having a start
block is VERY important to avoid fetching all <code>cfilters</code> starting
with block 1 (assume you generate your own filters/headers for the genesis
block).

== Acknowledgments ==

We would like to thank bfd (from the bitcoin-dev mailing list) for bringing the
basis of this BIP to our attention, Greg Maxwell for pointing us in the
direction of Golomb-Rice coding and fast range optimization, Joseph Poon for
suggesting the filter header chain scheme, and Pedro Martelletto for writing the
initial indexing code for <code>btcd</code>.

We would also like to thank Dave Collins, JJ Jeffrey, Eric Lombrozo for useful
discussions.

== Reference Implementation ==

Light client: [https://github.com/lightninglabs/neutrino]

Full-node indexing: https://github.com/Roasbeef/btcd/tree/segwit-cbf

Golomb-Rice Coded sets: https://github.com/Roasbeef/btcutil/tree/gcs/gcs

== Appendix A ==

=== Alternatives ===

A number of alternative set encodings were considered before Golomb-Rice coded
sets were settled upon. In this appendix section, we'll list a few of the
alternatives along with our rationale for not pursuing them.

==== Cryptographic Accumulators ====

Cryptographic accumulators
<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accumulator_(cryptography)</ref>are a
cryptographic data structure that enables (amongst other operations) a one way
membership test. One advantage of accumulators are that they are ''constant''
size, independent on the number of elements inserted into the accumulator.
However, current constructions of cryptographic accumulators require an initial
trusted set up. Additionally, accumulators based on the Strong-RSA Assumption
require mapping set items to prime representatives in the associated group
which can be preemptively expensive.

==== Matrix Based Probabilistic Set Datastructures ====

There exist data structures based on matrix solving which are even more space
efficient compared to bloom filters
<ref>https://arxiv.org/pdf/0804.1845.pdf</ref>. We instead opted for our
GCS-based filters as they have a much lower implementation complexity and are
easier to understand.

== Appendix B ==

=== Test Vectors ===

A set of test vectors using real blocks from Bitcoin's testnet3 can be found
[https://github.com/Roasbeef/bips/tree/master/gcs_light_client here]. The
vectors come in the form of CSV files, which for a given testnet height and
block hash contain the: basic filter header, extended filter header, basic
filter, and extended filter.


== References ==

<references/>

== Copyright ==

This document is licensed under the  Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal lisence.
