<pre>
  BIP: x
  Title: Dealing with OP_IF and OP_NOTIF malleability
  Author: jl2012 <jl2012@xbt.hk>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2015-11-06
</pre>

==Abstract==

As an supplement to BIP62, this document specifies proposed changes to the Bitcoin transaction validity rules in order to make malleability of transactions with OP_IF and OP_NOTIF impossible.

==Motivation==

OP_IF and OP_NOTIF are flow control codes in the Bitcoin script system. The programme flow is decided by whether the top stake value is 0 or not. However, this behavior opens a source of malleability as a third party may alter a non-zero flow control value to any other non-zero value without invalidating the transaction.

As of November 2015, OP_IF and OP_NOTIF are not commonly used in the blockchain. However, as more sophisticated functions such as OP_CHECKLOCKTIMEVERITY are being introduced, OP_IF and OP_NOTIF will become more popular and the related malleability should be fixed. This proposal serves as a supplement to BIP62 and should be implemented with other malleability fixes together.

==Specification==

If the transaction version is 3 or above, the flow control value for OP_IF and OP_NOTIF must be either 0 or 1, or the transaction fails.

This is to be implemented with BIP62.

==Compatibility==

This is a softfork. To ensure OP_IF and OP_NOTIF transactions created before the introduction of this BIP will still be accpeted by the network, the new rules only apply to transactions of version 3 or above.

For people who want to preserve the original behaviour of OP_IF and OP_NOTIF, an OP_0NOTEQUAL could be used before the flow control code to transform any non-zero value to 1.

==Reference==

BIP62: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0062.mediawiki
