==BIP70 Extensions==

Add your extension below using tags starting at 1000 and submit a pull-req.

{|
| Field Number || Extension Name || Field Names || Description

|-
| 1000-1001 || instantconfirmation || In PaymentDetails:
* requires_instant,
* trusted_instant_providers,
In Payment:
* instant_signature,
* instant_provider || Instant confirmation verified against double spends by a third party: [[instantconfirmation.proto|instantconfirmation.proto]]
|-

| 1002 || [[https://example.com|(unassigned)]] || (unassigned) || (unassigned)
|}

=== instantconfirmation ===
This extension adds 4 fields for requesting and providing an instant confirmation that the transaction was verified against double spends by a third party. This verification can be implemented for instance (as [[https://greenaddress.it|GreenAddress]] does) by requiring 2of2 client+server signature on some funds, where the server is a trusted entity that provides the instant verification.

===== ECSDA signing key derivation =====
The signature for instantconfirmation is done using a key derived from extended [[https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki|BIP32]] key stored by the merchant in a "domainname -> (key, chaincode)" mapping. Every merchant is responsible for deciding which set of third parties for instant confirmations they want to trust.

The key derivation is done as follows:
* The hash of first transaction from the Payment message is calculated and stored as `txhash`.
* `txhash` is splitted into 32 8-bit unsigned integers i0, i1, i2, ..., i31.
* Public-derived subkey i0/i1/i2/.../i31 is used for signing the Payment message.

===== instant_signature =====
instant_signature should be calculated from SHA256 hash of the serialized Transactions message (defined in [[instantconfirmation.proto|instantconfirmation.proto]]), with transactions field copied over from the Payment message.