=Service: Server=

* Service type: <code>server</code>
* Service vendor: <code>Electrum</code>

==Method: Add Peer==

A command to add the node to the peer list.

* Method name: <code>add_peer</code>

==Method: Banner==

A command to get the server banner.

* Method name: <code>banner</code>

{|
! <ins>[Request]</ins>
! Type
! Example
! Description
|-
! Method
| colspan="3" | <code>server.banner</code>
|-
! <ins>[Response]</ins>
! Type
! Example
! Description
|-
! Result
| <code>string</code>
| <code>Welcome to Electrum!</code>
| The server banner.
|}

==Method: Cache==

A command to get the server cache size.

* Method name: <code>cache</code>

==Method: Debug==

* Method name: <code>debug</code>

==Method: Donation Address==

A command to get the server donation address.

* Method name: <code>donation_address</code>

==Method: Features==

A command to get the server features.

* Method name: <code>features</code>

==Method: Info==

A command to get information about the active sessions.

* Method name: <code>info</code>

==Method: Load==

A command to get the server load.

* Method name: <code>load</code>

==Method: Peers==

A event to announce peers.

* Method name: <code>peers</code>

==Method: Ping==

A command to ping the server.

* Method name: <code>ping</code>

==Method: Stop==

A command to stop the server.

* Method name: <code>stop</code>

==Method: Version==

A command to set the client version, get the server version and negotiate the protocol version.

* Method name: <code>version</code>
* Introduced in: <code>0.1</code>

{|
! <ins>[Request]</ins>
! Type
! Example
! Description
|-
! Method
| colspan="3" | <code>server.version</code>
|-
! <ins>[Response]</ins>
! Type
! Example
! Description
|-
! Result
| <code>string</code> or <code>array</code>
| <code>Welcome to Electrum!</code>
| The server banner.
|}